===== 7836292 | Biochemical and molecular characterization of the Pseudomonas lemoignei polyhydroxyalkanoate depolymerase system.
J: Journal of bacteriology | Y: 1995 Feb | DOI: 
Pseudomonas lemoignei has five different polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) depolymerase genes (phaZ1 to phaZ5), which encode the extracellularly localized poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerases C, B, and D, poly(3-hydroxyvalerate) (PHV) depolymerase, and PHB depolymerase A, respectively. Four of the five genes (phaZ1 to phaZ4) have been cloned, and one of them (phaZ1) was studied in detail earlier (D. Jendrossek, B. Müller, and H. G. Schlegel, Eur. J. Biochem. 218:701-710, 1993). The fifth PHA depolymerase gene (phaZ5) was identified by colony hybridization of recombinant Escherichia coli clones with a phaZ5-specific oligonucleotide. The nucleotide sequence of a 3,704-bp EcoRI fragment was determined and found to contain two large open reading frames (ORFs) which coded for a polypeptide with significant similarities to glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenases of various sources (313 amino acids; M(r), 32,193) and for the precursor of PHB depolymerase A (PhaZ5; 433 amino acids; M(r), 44,906). The PHV depolymerase gene (phaZ4) was subcloned, and the nucleotide sequence of a 3,109-bp BamHI fragment was determined. Two large ORFs (ORF3 and ORF4) that represent putative coding regions were identified. The deduced amino acid sequence of ORF3 (134 amino acids; M(r), 14,686) revealed significant similarities to the branched-chain amino acid aminotransferase (IlfE) of enterobacteria. ORF4 (1,712 bp) was identified as the precursor of a PHV depolymerase (567 amino acids; M(r), 59,947). Analysis of primary structures of the five PHA depolymerases of P. lemoignei and of the PHB depolymerases of Alcaligenes faecalis and Pseudomonas pickettii revealed homologies of 25 to 83% to each other and a domain structure: at their N termini, they have typical signal peptides of exoenzymes. The adjacent catalytic domains are characterized by several conserved amino acids that constitute putative catalytic triads which consist of the consensus sequence of serine-dependent hydrolases including the pentapeptide G-X-S-X-G, a conserved histidine and aspartate, and a conserved region resembling the oxyanion hole of lipases. C terminal of the catalytic domain an approximately 40-amino-acid-long threonine-rich region (22 to 27 threonine residues) is present in PhaZ1, PhaZ2, PhaZ3, and PhaZ5. Instead of the threonine-rich region PhaZ4 and the PHB depolymerases of A. faecalis and P. pickettii contain an approximately 90-amino-acid-long sequence resembling the fibronectin type III module of eucaryotic extracellular matrix proteins. The function of the fibronectin type III module in PHA depolymerases remains obscure. Two types of C-terminal sequences apparently represent substrate-binding sites; the PHB type is present in the PHB depolymerases of A. faecalis and P. pickettii and in PhaZ2, PhaZ3, and PhaZ5 and the PHV type is present in the PHV-hydrolyzing depolymerases (PhaZ4 and PhaZ1). phaZ1 was transferred to A. eutrophus H16 and JMP222. All transconjugants of both strains were able to grow with extracellular PHB as a carbon source and produced translucent halos on PHB-containing solid media. PhaZ1, PhaZ2, PhaZ4, and PhaZ5 were purified from P. lemoignei and from recombinant E. coli; the processing sites of the precursors in E. coli were the same as in P. lemoignei, and similar substrate specificities were determined for the wild-type and the recombinant proteins. All PHA depolymerases hydrolyzed PHB at high specific activities. PhaZ1 and PhaZ4 additionally cleaved PHV, and PhaZ4 hydrolyzed poly(4-hydroxybutyrate). None of the depolymerases was able to hydrolyze polyactide or PHA consisting of monomers with more than five carbon atoms. While the wild-type depolymerase proteins were glycosylated and found to contain glucose and N-acetylglucosamine, none of the recombinant proteins was glycosylated. PHB hydrolysis was dependent on divalent cations such as Ca2+ and was inhibited by the presence of EDTA.

===== 8269961 | Cloning and characterization of the poly(hydroxyalkanoic acid)-depolymerase gene locus, phaZ1, of Pseudomonas lemoignei and its gene product.
J: European journal of biochemistry | Y: 1993 Dec 01 | DOI: 
Four different DNA fragments each coding for poly(hydroxyalkanoic acid) depolymerase (phaZ1-phaZ4) were isolated in pUC plasmids from a genomic library of Pseudomonas lemoignei in Escherichia coli. All recombinant strains secreted a highly active poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid) depolymerase and produced large translucent halos on an opaque medium containing poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid) granules. One DNA region (phaZ1) was present in seven independently isolated clones. Three other cloned DNA fragments were different from phaZ1 and from each other (phaZ2-phaZ4). In phaZ1, an open-reading frame of 1245 bp was identified from the nucleotide sequence of a 5435-bp MboI fragment (57 mol G + C/100 mol) of this region and encoded a novel poly(hydroxyalkanoic acid) depolymerase of P. lemoignei, poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid) depolymerase C. A leader-sequence peptidase-cleavage site was predicted from the deduced amino acid sequence between Ala37 and Leu38. The calculated relative molecular masses of the precursor and the putative mature protein were 43468 and 39581, respectively. The polypeptide contains a lipase consensus sequence (Gly-Xaa-Ser-Xaa-Gly) and an unusually high proportion of threonine residues (22 of 36 amino acids) near the C-terminus. The N-terminus of the deduced amino acid sequence of PhaZ1 differed from that of the purified poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid) depolymerases A, B and the poly(3-hydroxyvaleric acid) depolymerase of P. lemoignei. The phaZ1 gene product, poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid) depolymerase C, was partially purified from recombinant E. coli (pUC91::phaZ1). The purified protein was specific for poly(hydroxyalkanoic acid) consisting of monomers of four or five carbon atoms and for p-nithrophenylbutyrate as substrates. The polymer-hydrolyzing activity, but not the p-nitrophenylate esterase activity, was inhibited by complex media such as Luria-Bertani medium and by soluble E. coli proteins. The enzyme protein did not cross-react with antibodies raised against purified poly(3-hydroxyvaleric acid) depolymerase of P. lemoignei.

===== 10742216 | Poly(3-hydroxyvalerate) depolymerase of Pseudomonas lemoignei.
J: Applied and environmental microbiology | Y: 2000 Apr | DOI: 
Pseudomonas lemoignei is equipped with at least five polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) depolymerase structural genes (phaZ1 to phaZ5) which enable the bacterium to utilize extracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB), poly(3-hydroxyvalerate) (PHV), and related polyesters consisting of short-chain-length hxdroxyalkanoates (PHA(SCL)) as the sole sources of carbon and energy. Four genes (phaZ1, phaZ2, phaZ3, and phaZ5) encode PHB depolymerases C, B, D, and A, respectively. It was speculated that the remaining gene, phaZ4, encodes the PHV depolymerase (D. Jendrossek, A. Frisse, A. Behrends, M. Andermann, H. D. Kratzin, T. Stanislawski, and H. G. Schlegel, J. Bacteriol. 177:596-607, 1995). However, in this study, we show that phaZ4 codes for another PHB depolymeraes (i) by disagreement of 5 out of 41 amino acids that had been determined by Edman degradation of the PHV depolymerase and of four endoproteinase GluC-generated internal peptides with the DNA-deduced sequence of phaZ4, (ii) by the lack of immunological reaction of purified recombinant PhaZ4 with PHV depolymerase-specific antibodies, and (iii) by the low activity of the PhaZ4 depolymerase with PHV as a substrate. The true PHV depolymerase-encoding structural gene, phaZ6, was identified by screening a genomic library of P. lemoignei in Escherichia coli for clearing zone formation on PHV agar. The DNA sequence of phaZ6 contained all 41 amino acids of the GluC-generated peptide fragments of the PHV depolymerase. PhaZ6 was expressed and purified from recombinant E. coli and showed immunological identity to the wild-type PHV depolymerase and had high specific activities with PHB and PHV as substrates. To our knowledge, this is the first report on a PHA(SCL) depolymerase gene that is expressed during growth on PHV or odd-numbered carbon sources and that encodes a protein with high PHV depolymerase activity. Amino acid analysis revealed that PhaZ6 (relative molecular mass [M(r)], 43,610 Da) resembles precursors of other extracellular PHA(SCL) depolymerases (28 to 50% identical amino acids). The mature protein (M(r), 41,048) is composed of (i) a large catalytic domain including a catalytic triad of S(136), D(211), and H(269) similar to serine hydrolases; (ii) a linker region highly enriched in threonine residues and other amino acids with hydroxylated or small side chains (Thr-rich region); and (iii) a C-terminal domain similar in sequence to the substrate-binding domain of PHA(SCL) depolymerases. Differences in the codon usage of phaZ6 for some codons from the average codon usage of P. lemoignei indicated that phaZ6 might be derived from other organisms by gene transfer. Multialignment of separate domains of bacterial PHA(SCL) depolymerases suggested that not only complete depolymerase genes but also individual domains might have been exchanged between bacteria during evolution of PHA(SCL) depolymerases.

===== 1504046 | Extracellular poly(hydroxyalkanoate) depolymerases and their inhibitor from Pseudomonas lemoignei.
J: International journal of biological macromolecules | Y: 1992 Aug | DOI: 
Enzymatic degradation processes of microbial copolyesters, poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate): P(3HB-co-3HV) and poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-4-hydroxybutyrate): P(3HB-co-4HB), were studied by the weight loss (erosion) of copolyester films. These studies employed three extracellular depolymerases which degrade poly(3-hydroxybutyrate): P(3HB). Two enzymes were purified from the culture supernatant of Pseudomonas lemoignei and one from Alcaligenes faecalis T1. The rate of enzymatic degradation of microbial copolyester films with various compositions showed an almost similar tendency to three different P(3HB) depolymerases, and decreased in the following order: P(3HB-co-4HB) greater than P(3HB) greater than P(3HB-co-3HV). An inhibitory protein of P(3HB) depolymerases in the succinate culture medium of P. lemoignei was isolated and characterized. The molecular weight of P(3HB) depolymerase inhibitor was 35,000 as determined by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulphate. This inhibitor of a single polypeptide chain may reversibly bind the serine residues at the active site of P(3HB) depolymerase. This inhibitory protein was not induced in the culture medium when P. lemoignei was grown on P(3HB) as the sole carbon source.

===== 12099828 | The "PHB depolymerase inhibitor" of Paucimonas lemoignei is a PHB depolymerase.
J: Biomacromolecules | Y: 2002 | DOI: 
A approximately 35 kDa protein that has been described to be secreted by Paucimonas lemoignei during growth on succinate and to inhibit hydrolysis of denatured (crystalline) poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (dPHB) by extracellular PHB depolymerases of P. lemoignei (PHB depolymerase inhibitor (PDI)) was purified and characterized. Purified PDI (M(r), 36 199 +/- 45 Da) inhibited hydrolysis of dPHB by two selected purified PHB depolymerases (PhaZ2 and PhaZ5) but did not inhibit the hydrolysis of water-soluble substrates such as p-nitrophenylbutyrate by PhaZ5 and PhaZ2. PDI revealed a high binding affinity to dPHB although it was not able to hydrolyze the crystalline polymer. However, purified PDI had a high hydrolytic activity if native (amorphous) PHB (nPHB) was used as a substrate. N-terminal sequencing of PDI revealed that it was identical to recently described extracellular PHB depolymerase PhaZ7 which is specific for nPHB and which cannot hydrolyze dPHB. To confirm that the inhibition of hydrolysis of dPHB by PhaZ7 is an indirect surface competition effect at high depolymerase concentration, the activity of PHB depolymerases PhaZ2 and PhaZ5 in the presence of different amounts of protein mixtures was determined. The components of NB or LB medium inhibited hydrolysis of the polymer in a concentration-dependent manner but had no effect on the hydrolysis of p-nitrophenylbutyrate by PHB depolymerases. In combination with PHB depolymerases PhaZ2 and PhaZ5 the protein PhaZ7 ("PDI") enables the bacteria to hydrolyze dPHB and nPHB simultaneously.

===== 12855176 | Identification and characterisation of the catalytic triad of the alkaliphilic thermotolerant PHA depolymerase PhaZ7 of Paucimonas lemoignei.
J: FEMS microbiology letters | Y: 2003 Jul 15 | DOI: 
The recently discovered extracellular poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate] (PHB) depolymerase PhaZ7 of Paucimonas lemoignei represents the first member of a new subgroup (EC 3.1.1.75) of serine hydrolases with no significant amino acid similarities to conventional PHB depolymerases, lipases or other hydrolases except for a potential lipase box-like motif (Ala-His-Ser136-Met-Gly) and potential candidates for catalytic triad and oxyanion pocket amino acids. In order to identify amino acids essential for activity 11 mutants of phaZ7 were generated by site-directed mutagenesis and expressed in recombinant protease-deficient Bacillus subtilis WB800. The wild-type depolymerase and 10 of the 11 mutant proteins (except for Ser136Cys) were expressed and efficiently secreted by B. subtilis as shown by Western blots of cell-free culture fluid proteins. No PHB depolymerase activity was detected in strains harbouring one of the following substitutions: His47Ala, Ser136Ala, Asp242Ala, Asp242Asn, His306Ala, indicating the importance of these amino acids for activity. Replacement of Ser136 by Thr resulted in a decrease of activity to about 20% of the wild-type level and suggested that the hydroxy group of the serine side chain is important for activity but can be partially replaced by the hydroxy function of threonine. Alterations of Asp256 to Ala or Asn or of the putative serine hydrolase pentapeptide motif (Ala-His-Ser136-Met-Gly) to a lipase box consensus sequence (Gly134-His-Ser136-Met-Gly) or to the PHB depolymerase box consensus sequence (Gly134-Leu135-Ser136-Met-Gly) had no significant effect on PHB depolymerase activity, indicating that these amino acids or sequence motifs were not essential for activity. In conclusion, the PHB depolymerase PhaZ7 is a serine hydrolase with a catalytic triad and oxyanion pocket consisting of His47, Ser136, Asp242 and His306.

