===== 19561190 | Identification and characterization of a novel intracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase from Bacillus megaterium.
J: Applied and environmental microbiology | Y: 2009 Aug | DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00621-09
A gene that codes for a novel intracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerase, designated PhaZ1, has been identified in the genome of Bacillus megaterium. A native PHB (nPHB) granule-binding assay showed that purified soluble PhaZ1 had strong affinity for nPHB granules. Turbidimetric analyses revealed that PhaZ1 could rapidly degrade nPHB granules in vitro without the need for protease pretreatment of the granules to remove surface proteins. Notably, almost all the final hydrolytic products produced from the in vitro degradation of nPHB granules by PhaZ1 were 3-hydroxybutyric acid (3HB) monomers. Unexpectedly, PhaZ1 could also hydrolyze denatured semicrystalline PHB, with the generation of 3HB monomers. The disruption of the phaZ1 gene significantly affected intracellular PHB mobilization during the PHB-degrading stage in B. megaterium, as demonstrated by transmission electron microscopy and the measurement of the PHB content. These results indicate that PhaZ1 is functional in intracellular PHB mobilization in vivo. Some of these features, which are in striking contrast with those of other known nPHB granule-degrading PhaZs, may provide an advantage for B. megaterium PhaZ1 in fermentative production of the biotechnologically valuable chiral compound (R)-3HB.

===== 16936025 | Identification and characterization of the Bacillus thuringiensis phaZ gene, encoding new intracellular poly-3-hydroxybutyrate depolymerase.
J: Journal of bacteriology | Y: 2006 Nov | DOI: 
A gene that codes for a novel intracellular poly-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) depolymerase has now been identified in the genome of Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis ATCC 35646. This gene, previously annotated as a hypothetical 3-oxoadipate enol-lactonase (PcaD) gene and now designated phaZ, encodes a protein that shows no significant similarity with any known PHB depolymerase. Purified His-tagged PhaZ could efficiently degrade trypsin-activated native PHB granules as well as artificial amorphous PHB granules and release 3-hydroxybutyrate monomer as a hydrolytic product, but it could not hydrolyze denatured semicrystalline PHB. In contrast, purified His-tagged PcaD of Pseudomonas putida was unable to degrade trypsin-activated native PHB granules and artificial amorphous PHB granules. The B. thuringiensis PhaZ was inactive against p-nitrophenylpalmitate, tributyrin, and triolein. Sonication supernatants of the wild-type B. thuringiensis cells exhibited a PHB-hydrolyzing activity in vitro, whereas those prepared from a phaZ mutant lost this activity. The phaZ mutant showed a higher PHB content than the wild type at late stationary phase of growth in a nutrient-rich medium, indicating that this PhaZ can function as a PHB depolymerase in vivo. PhaZ contains a lipase box-like sequence (G-W-S(102)-M-G) but lacks a signal peptide. A purified His-tagged S102A variant had lost the PHB-hydrolyzing activity. Taken together, these results indicate that B. thuringiensis harbors a new type of intracellular PHB depolymerase.

===== 21274528 | Biochemical characterization of a new type of intracellular PHB depolymerase from Rhodospirillum rubrum with high hydrolytic activity on native PHB granules.
J: Applied microbiology and biotechnology | Y: 2011 Mar | DOI: 10.1007/s00253-011-3096-7
A Rhodospirillum rubrum gene that is predicted to code for an extracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerase by the recently published polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) depolymerase engineering database was cloned. The gene product (PhaZ3( Rru )) was expressed in recombinant E. coli, purified and biochemically characterized. PhaZ3( Rru ) turned out, however, to share characteristics of intracellular PHB depolymerases and revealed a combination of properties that have not yet been described for other PHB depolymerases. A fusion of PhaZ3( Rru )with the enhanced cyan fluorescent protein was able to bind to PHB granules in vivo and supported the function as an intracellular PHB depolymerase. Purified PhaZ3( Rru ) was specific for short-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA(SCL)) and hydrolysed both untreated native PHB granules as well as trypsin-activated native PHB granules to a mixture of mono- and dimeric 3-hydroxybutyrate. Crystalline (denatured) PHB granules were not hydrolysed by PhayZ3( Rru ). Low concentrations of calcium or magnesium ions (1-5 mM) reversibly (EDTA) inhibited the enzyme. Our data suggest that PhaZ3( Rru ) is the representative of a new type of the growing number of intracellular PHB depolymerases.

===== 15489436 | The "intracellular" poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerase of Rhodospirillum rubrum is a periplasm-located protein with specificity for native PHB and with structural similarity to extracellular PHB depolymerases.
J: Journal of bacteriology | Y: 2004 Nov | DOI: 
Rhodospirillum rubrum possesses a putative intracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerase system consisting of a soluble PHB depolymerase, a heat-stable activator, and a 3-hydroxybutyrate dimer hydrolase (J. M. Merrick and M. Doudoroff, J. Bacteriol. 88:60-71, 1964). In this study we reinvestigated the soluble R. rubrum PHB depolymerase (PhaZ1). It turned out that PhaZ1 is a novel type of PHB depolymerase with unique properties. Purified PhaZ1 was specific for amorphous short-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) such as native PHB, artificial PHB, and oligomer esters of (R)-3-hydroxybutyrate with 3 or more 3-hydroxybutyrate units. Atactic PHB, (S)-3-hydroxybutyrate oligomers, medium-chain-length PHA, and lipase substrates (triolein, tributyrin) were not hydrolyzed. The PHB depolymerase structural gene (phaZ1) was cloned. Its deduced amino acid sequence (37,704 Da) had no significant similarity to those of intracellular PHB depolymerases of Wautersia eutropha or of other PHB-accumulating bacteria. PhaZ1 was found to have strong amino acid homology with type-II catalytic domains of extracellular PHB depolymerases, and Ser(42), Asp(138), and His(178) were identified as catalytic-triad amino acids, with Ser(42) as the putative active site. Surprisingly, the first 23 amino acids of the PHB depolymerase previously assumed to be intracellular revealed features of classical signal peptides, and Edman sequencing of purified PhaZ1 confirmed the functionality of the predicted cleavage site. Extracellular PHB depolymerase activity was absent, and analysis of cell fractions unequivocally showed that PhaZ1 is a periplasm-located enzyme. The previously assumed intracellular activator/depolymerase system is unlikely to have a physiological function in PHB mobilization in vivo. A second gene, encoding the putative true intracellular PHB depolymerase (PhaZ2), was identified in the genome sequence of R. rubrum.

===== 14757249 | The activator of the Rhodospirillum rubrum PHB depolymerase is a polypeptide that is extremely resistant to high temperature (121 degrees C) and other physical or chemical stresses.
J: FEMS microbiology letters | Y: 2004 Jan 30 | DOI: 
Hydrolysis of native (amorphous) polyhydroxybutyrate (nPHB) granules isolated from different sources by soluble PHB depolymerase of Rhodospirillum rubrum in vitro requires the presence of a heat-stable compound (activator). The activator was purified and was resistant against various physical and chemical stresses such as heat (up to 130 degrees C), pH 1-12, dryness, oxidation by H2O2, reducing and denaturing compounds (2-mercaptoethanol, 5 M guanidinium-HCl) and many solvents including phenol/chloroform. The activator coding gene was identified by N-terminal sequencing of the purified protein, and the deduced protein showed significant homology to magnetosome-associated protein (Mms16) of magnetotactic bacteria. Analysis of the activation process in vitro showed that the activator acts on nPHB granules but not on the depolymerase. The effect of the activator could be mimicked by pretreatment of nPHB granules with trypsin or other proteases but protease activity of the purified activator was not detected. Evidence is shown that different mechanisms were responsible for activation of nPHB by trypsin and activator, respectively. PHB granule-associated protein (PhaP) of Ralstonia eutropha nPHB granules were cleaved by trypsin but no cleavage occurred after activator treatment. Hydrolysis of artificial protein-free PHB granules coated with negatively charged detergents (sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), cholate but not cetyltrimethyl-ammonium bromide (CTAB)) did not require activation and confirmed that surface layer proteins of nPHB granules are the targets of the activator rather than lipids. All experimental data are in agreement with the assumption that trypsin and the activator enable the PHB depolymerase to find and to bind to the polymer surface: trypsin by removing a portion of proteins from the polymer surface, the activator by modifying the surface structure in a not yet understood manner presumably by interaction with phasins of the proteinous surface layer of nPHB.

===== 15060050 | Unraveling the function of the Rhodospirillum rubrum activator of polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) degradation: the activator is a PHB-granule-bound protein (phasin).
J: Journal of bacteriology | Y: 2004 Apr | DOI: 
Efficient hydrolysis of native poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (nPHB) granules in vitro by soluble PHB depolymerase of Rhodospirillum rubrum requires pretreatment of nPHB with an activator compound present in R. rubrum cells (J. M. Merrick and M. Doudoroff, J. Bacteriol. 88:60-71, 1964). Edman sequencing of the purified activator (17.4 kDa; matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry) revealed identity to a hypothetical protein deduced from a partially sequenced R. rubrum genome. The complete activator gene, apdA (activator of polymer degradation), was cloned from genomic DNA, expressed as a six-His-tagged protein in recombinant Escherichia coli (M(r), 18.3 x 10(3)), and purified. The effect of ApdA on PHB metabolism was studied in vitro and in vivo. In vitro, the activity of the activator could be replaced by trypsin, but recombinant ApdA itself had no protease activity. Comparative sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis of the protein patterns of trypsin- and ApdA-treated nPHB granules isolated from different PHB-accumulating bacteria showed that trypsin activated nPHB by removing proteins of the surface layer of nPHB regardless of the origin of nPHB, but ApdA bound to and interacted with the surface layer of nPHB in a nonproteolytic manner, thereby transforming nPHB into an activated form that was accessible to the depolymerase. In vivo, expression of ApdA in E. coli harboring the PHB biosynthetic genes, phaCBA, resulted in significant increases in the number and surface/volume ratio of accumulated PHB granules, which was comparable to the effect of phasin proteins, such as PhaP in Ralstonia eutropha. The amino acid sequence of ApdA was 55% identical to the amino acid sequence of Mms16, a magnetosome-associated protein in magnetotactic Magnetospirillum species. Mms16 was previously reported to be a GTPase with an essential function in magnetosome formation (Y. Okamura, H. Takeyama, and T. Matsunaga, J. Biol. Chem. 276:48183-48188, 2001). However, no GTPase activity of ApdA could be demonstrated. We obtained evidence that Mms16 of Magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense can functionally replace ApdA in R. rubrum. Fusions of apdA and mms16 to gfp or yfp were functionally expressed, and both fusions colocalized with PHB granules after conjugative transfer to R. rubrum. In conclusion, ApdA in vivo is a PHB-bound, phasin-like protein in R. rubrum. The function of Mms16 in magnetotactic bacteria requires further clarification.

===== 29435618 | Inactivation of an intracellular poly-3-hydroxybutyrate depolymerase of Azotobacter vinelandii allows to obtain a polymer of uniform high molecular mass.
J: Applied microbiology and biotechnology | Y: 2018 Mar | DOI: 10.1007/s00253-018-8806-y
A novel poly-3-hydroxybutyrate depolymerase was identified in Azotobacter vinelandii. This enzyme, now designated PhbZ1, is associated to the poly-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) granules and when expressed in Escherichia coli, it showed in vitro PHB depolymerizing activity on native or artificial PHB granules, but not on crystalline PHB. Native PHB (nPHB) granules isolated from a PhbZ1 mutant had a diminished endogenous in vitro hydrolysis of the polyester, when compared to the granules of the wild-type strain. This in vitro degradation was also tested in the presence of free coenzyme A. Thiolytic degradation of the polymer was observed in the nPHB granules of the wild type, resulting in the formation of 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA, but was absent in the granules of the mutant. It was previously reported that cultures of A. vinelandii OP grown in a bioreactor showed a decrease in the weight average molecular weight (Mw) of the PHB after 20 h of culture, with an increase in the fraction of polymers of lower molecular weight. This decrease was correlated with an increase in the PHB depolymerase activity during the culture. Here, we show that in the phbZ1 mutant, neither the decrease in the Mw nor the appearance of a low molecular weight polymers occurred. In addition, a higher PHB accumulation was observed in the cultures of the phbZ1 mutant. These results suggest that PhbZ1 has a role in the degradation of PHB in cultures in bioreactors and its inactivation allows the production of a polymer of a uniform high molecular weight.

===== 41199521 | Phasins PhbP2 and PhbP3 Are Involved in the Depolymerization of Polyhydroxybutyrate in Azotobacter vinelandii.
J: Journal of basic microbiology | Y: 2025 Dec | DOI: 10.1002/jobm.70124
Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) is a natural polyester synthesized and stored intracellularly as cytoplasmic granules, serving as a carbon and energy reserve in certain bacteria. These granules are surrounded by a variety of proteins, including those directly involved in PHB metabolism-both in its synthesis and degradation-as well as a group of non-enzymatic proteins known as phasins, which constitute the major protein component of the PHB granule. Although phasins lack enzymatic activity, some, such as PhbP1 in Azotobacter vinelandii, significantly influence granule size and number, while others have been shown to modulate enzymes involved in PHB synthesis or degradation in PHB-producing bacteria. This study aimed to elucidate the roles of phasins PhbP2 and PhbP3 in PHB metabolism in A. vinelandii. Our findings indicate that PhbP3 belongs to a novel family of phasin proteins and demonstrate that, although PhbP2 and PhbP3 do not contribute to granule structure, they are involved in PHB degradation. Gene inactivation of phbP2 and phbP3 led to a decrease in PHB depolymerase activity. Additionally, SDS-PAGE analysis revealed alterations in the relative abundance of some granule-associated proteins in the mutants, suggesting that PhbP2 and PhbP3 may play a role in stabilizing proteins on the PHB granule surface.

===== 11267773 | Identification of the intracellular polyhydroxyalkanoate depolymerase gene of Paracoccus denitrificans and some properties of the gene product.
J: FEMS microbiology letters | Y: 2001 Mar 15 | DOI: 
Paracoccus denitrificans degraded poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) in the cells under carbon source starvation. Intracellular poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) (PHA) depolymerase gene (phaZ) was identified near the PHA synthase gene (phaC) of P. denitrificans. Cell extract of Escherichia coli carrying lacZ--phaZ fusion gene degraded protease-treated PHB granules. Reaction products were thought to be mainly D(--)-3-hydroxybutyrate (3HB) dimer and 3HB oligomer. Diisopropylfluorophosphonate and Triton X-100 exhibited an inhibitory effect on the degradation of PHB granules. When cell extract of the recombinant E. coli was used, Mg(2+) ion inhibited PHB degradation. However, the inhibitory effect by Mg(2+) ion was not observed using the cell extract of P. denitrificans.

===== 24271169 | 3-Hydroxybutyrate oligomer hydrolase and 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase participate in intracellular polyhydroxybutyrate and polyhydroxyvalerate degradation in Paracoccus denitrificans.
J: Applied and environmental microbiology | Y: 2014 Feb | DOI: 10.1128/AEM.03396-13
Genes encoding 3-hydroxybutyrate oligomer hydrolase (PhaZc) and 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase (Hbd) were isolated from Paracoccus denitrificans. PhaZc and Hbd were overproduced as His-tagged proteins in Escherichia coli and purified by affinity and gel filtration chromatography. Purified His-tagged proteins had molecular masses of 31 kDa and 120 kDa (a tetramer of 29-kDa subunits). The His-tagged PhaZc hydrolyzed not only 3-hydroxybutyrate oligomers but also 3-hydroxyvalerate oligomers. The His-tagged Hbd catalyzed the dehydrogenation of 3-hydroxyvalerate as well as 3-hydroxybutyrate. When both enzymes were included in the same enzymatic reaction system with 3-hydroxyvalerate dimer, sequential reactions occurred, suggesting that PhaZc and Hbd play an important role in the intracellular degradation of poly(3-hydroxyvalerate). When the phaZc gene was disrupted in P. denitrificans by insertional inactivation, the mutant strain lost PhaZc activity. When the phaZc-disrupted P. denitrificans was complemented with phaZc, PhaZc activity was restored. These results suggest that P. denitrificans carries a single phaZc gene. Disruption of the phaZc gene in P. denitrificans affected the degradation rate of PHA.

===== 11814660 | Purification and properties of D-(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate oligomer hydrolase of Paracoccus denitrificans.
J: FEMS microbiology letters | Y: 2002 Jan 10 | DOI: 
D-(-)-3-Hydroxybutyrate (3HB) oligomer hydrolase was purified from Paracoccus denitrificans. The enzyme was a monomeric protein with an approximate molecular mass of 31 kDa. The isoelectric point of the enzyme was 5.2. Optimum temperature and pH were 35-40 degrees C and 8.0, respectively. The enzyme activity was not affected by sulfhydryl reagents but strongly inhibited by serine proteinase inhibitors. Both 3HB trimer and 3HB dimer were hydrolyzed by the enzyme, indicating that the enzyme is not 3HB dimer hydrolase but 3HB oligomer hydrolase. para-Nitrophenyl esters of short-chain fatty acids were also hydrolyzed by the enzyme. 3HB dimer was hydrolyzed somewhat faster than 3HB trimer. The level of the enzyme activity was almost constant, irrespective of carbon sources for the bacterial growth and of the cultivation conditions.

===== 8981982 | Purification of an extracellular D-(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate oligomer hydrolase from Pseudomonas sp. strain A1 and cloning and sequencing of its gene.
J: Journal of bacteriology | Y: 1997 Jan | DOI: 
An extracellular D-(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate oligomer hydrolase was purified from a poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)-degrading bacterium, Pseudomonas sp. strain A1. The purified enzyme hydrolyzed the D-(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate dimer and trimer at similar rates. The enzyme activity was inhibited by a low concentration of diisopropylfluorophosphate. The molecular weight of the hydrolase was estimated to be about 70,000 by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. A 10-kbp DNA fragment of A1 was detected by hybridization with the gene (2 kbp) of an extracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase from Alcaligenes faecalis. Subsequent subcloning showed that a SmaI-KpnI fragment (2.8 kbp) was responsible for expression of the hydrolase in Escherichia coli and an in vitro transcription-translation system. The expressed protein detected by immunostaining had the same molecular weight as the purified enzyme from A1. The protein band detected in the in vitro transcription-translation system had a molecular size of 72 kDa. The nucleotide sequence of the SmaI-KpnI fragment was determined, and one open reading frame (2,112 nucleotides) was found. It specifies a protein with a deduced molecular weight of 72,876 (704 amino acids). In this sequence, the consensus sequence of serine-dependent hydrolysis, G-X-S-X-G, did not exist.

===== 6626560 | An extracellular D(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate oligomer hydrolase from Alcaligenes faecalis.
J: Biochimica et biophysica acta | Y: 1983 Oct 28 | DOI: 
A strain of Alcaligenes faecalis secretes an extracellular D(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate oligomer hydrolase, in addition to poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase, when it is grown in a medium containing poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) as the sole carbon source. The oligomer hydrolase (EC 3.1.1.22), which has been purified to electrophoretic homogeneity, has a molecular weight of 68 000, as estimated by Sephadex G-100 gel filtration, and of 74 000, by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate. The isoelectric point of the enzyme is approx. 6.0 and the pH optimum for the enzyme reaction is 8.5. The purified oligomer hydrolase has high affinity for oligomeric esters (apparent Km for the D(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate dimer = 32.8 microM; for the dodecamer = 1.3 microM), but does not attack poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (average molecular weight, 32 500) at all. Analysis of hydrolysates of the oligomeric esters suggests that the enzyme hydrolyzes these substrates from the carboxyl terminus, releasing D(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate units one by one.

===== 7285912 | Purification and properties of D(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate-dimer hydrolase from Zoogloea ramigera I-16-M.
J: European journal of biochemistry | Y: 1981 Aug | DOI: 
D(-)-3-Hydroxybutyrate-dimer hydrolase from Zoogloea ramigera I-16-M was purified 7000-fold to electrophoretic homogeneity. The molecular weight of the purified enzyme was 28 000 as determined by Sephadex G-100 gel filtration, and 30 000 as estimated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate. The isoelectric point was at pH 5.7. The pH optimum for the enzyme reaction was 8.0. The dimer hydrolase was stereospecific for D(-)-3-[D(-)-3-hydroxybutyryloxy]butyric acid (DD-dimer) but also hydrolyzed D(-)-3-[L(+)-3-hydroxybutyryloxy]butyric acid (DL-dimmer) and L(+)-3-[D(-)-3-hydroxybutyryloxy]butyric acid (LD-dimer) at reduced rates. However, the enzyme did not attack L(+)-3-[L(+)-3-hydroxybutyryloxy]butyric acid (LL-dimer) at all. In addition, the purified hydrolase hydrolyzed several oligomeric esters of D(-)-3-hydroxybutyric acid (DDD-dimer, DDDD-tetramer and DDDDD-pentamer) faster than DD-dimer. Time course experiments with these oligomers and analysis of hydrolytic products of DDD-tetramer methyl ester with the hydrolase indicated that the enzyme attached these substrates from the free hydroxyl terminus releasing monomer units one at a time.

===== 12070691 | Cloning and sequencing of an intracellular D(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate oligomer hydrolase from Acidovorax sp. strain SA1 and purification of the enzyme.
J: Current microbiology | Y: 2002 Aug | DOI: 
The gene of an intracellular D(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate oligomer hydrolase (i3HBOH) was cloned and sequenced from a poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB)-degrading bacterium, Acidovorax sp. strain SA1. The i3HBOH gene has 876 nucleotides corresponding to the deduced sequence of 292 amino acids. In this amino acid sequence, the general lipase box sequence (G-X(1)-S-X(2)-G) was found, whose serine residue was determined to the active sites serine by site-directed mutagenesis. An i3HBOH was purified to electrophoretical homogeneity from SA1. The molecular mass of the purified enzyme was estimated to be 32 kDa by SDS-PAGE. The N-terminal amino acid sequence of the purified enzyme corresponded to the deduced N-terminal amino acid sequence in the cloned i3HBOH gene. This is the first cloning and sequencing of an intracellular D(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate oligomer hydrolase gene to date.

===== 17964488 | Purification and molecular cloning of an intracellular 3-hydroxybutyrate-oligomer hydrolase from Paucimonas lemoignei.
J: Journal of bioscience and bioengineering | Y: 2007 Sep | DOI: 
An intracellular 3-hydroxybutyrate-oligomer hydrolase was purified from a poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)-degrading bacterium, Paucimonas lemoignei. It hydrolyzed the 3-hydroxybutyrate dimer with the highest specific activity of any of the enzymes reported so far. The gene was cloned and sequenced. The deduced amino acid sequence showed that the enzyme is a homolog of the PhaZc of Ralstonia eutropha H16.

===== 8764515 | Determination of the active sites serine of the poly (3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerases of Pseudomonas lemoignei (PhaZ5) and of Alcaligenes faecalis.
J: FEMS microbiology letters | Y: 1996 Jul 15 | DOI: 
Mutational analysis of the poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerase A of Pseudomonas lemoignei and of the poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase of Alcaligenes faecalis revealed that S138 (P. lemoignei) and S139 (A. faecalis) are essential for activity. Both serines are part of a strictly conserved pentapeptide sequence which is present in all poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerases analyzed so far (G-L-S-S(A)-G) and which resembles the lipase box of lipases and other serine hydrolases (G-X-S-X-G). Mutation of another conserved serine, namely S195 (P. lemoignei) and S196 (A. faecalis), resulted in mutant proteins with almost full activity and proved that S195 and S196 are not essential for activity. The results indicate the structural and functional relationship of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerases to the family of serine hydrolases.

===== 16935252 | Characterization of two 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenases in poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)-degradable bacterium, Ralstonia pickettii T1.
J: Journal of bioscience and bioengineering | Y: 2006 Jun | DOI: 
Two D-(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate (3HB) dehydrogenases, BDH1 and BDH2, were isolated and purified from a poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB)-degradable bacterium, Ralstonia pickettii T1. BDH1 activity increased in R. pickettii T1 cells grown on several organic acids as a carbon source but not on 3HB, whereas BDH2 activity markedly increased in the same cells grown on 3HB or PHB. To examine their biochemical properties, bdh1 and bdh2 were cloned and overexpressed in Escherichia coli, and their purified products were characterized. The kinetic parameters indicate that BDH1 is more suitable for converting acetoacetate to 3HB than BDH2, whereas BDH2 is more efficient for the reverse reaction than BDH1. Thus, R. pickettii T1 contains two BDHs with different biochemical properties and physiological roles: BDH1 for cell growth on organic acids other than 3HB and BDH2 for cell growth on 3HB or PHB.

===== 19219638 | Characterization of a novel 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase from Ralstonia pickettii T1.
J: Antonie van Leeuwenhoek | Y: 2009 Mar | DOI: 10.1007/s10482-009-9308-9
We previously reported that the activities of two 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenases (BDH1 and BDH2) were greatly influenced by culture conditions when Ralstonia pickettii T1, a strain growing on extracellular poly-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB), was grown on different carbon sources such as 3HB and succinate. In this study, knockout mutants of bdh1 or bdh2 were constructed and characterized under different culture conditions. In addition, a novel BDH (BDH3) was found in bdh2 mutants, and bdh3 was cloned. Apparent kinetic parameters for the substrates of BDH3 indicated that the enzyme is suitable for the oxidation reaction of 3-hydroxybutyrate (3HB) to acetoacetate. In Western blotting, it was clear that BDH3 is produced only in cells grown on 3HB or PHB as a carbon source, while BDH1 and BDH2 are produced in cells grown on various carbon sources such as sugars, amino acids, organic acids, 3HB, and PHB. Both the bdh1 and bdh2 mutants lagged behind the wild type in growth rates when the cells were cultured with 3HB, citrate, succinate, or nutrient broth. A test of sensitivity to diamide as an oxidative stress revealed that the lack of BDH1 or BDH2 caused a decline in the capacity to neutralize the stress. These results suggested that BDH1 and BDH2 are needed to regulate the cytoplasmic redox state as well as to utilize 3HB, while BDH3 is specialized to utilize 3HB. The expression of bdh3 may be coordinately regulated with a gene encoding putative 3HB permease.

===== 9922248 | Poly-3-hydroxybutyrate degradation in Rhizobium (Sinorhizobium) meliloti: isolation and characterization of a gene encoding 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase.
J: Journal of bacteriology | Y: 1999 Feb | DOI: 
We have cloned and sequenced the 3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase-encoding gene (bdhA) from Rhizobium (Sinorhizobium) meliloti. The gene has an open reading frame of 777 bp that encodes a polypeptide of 258 amino acid residues (molecular weight 27,177, pI 6.07). The R. meliloti Bdh protein exhibits features common to members of the short-chain alcohol dehydrogenase superfamily. bdhA is the first gene transcribed in an operon that also includes xdhA, encoding xanthine oxidase/dehydrogenase. Transcriptional start site analysis by primer extension identified two transcription starts. S1, a minor start site, was located 46 to 47 nucleotides upstream of the predicted ATG start codon, while S2, the major start site, was mapped 148 nucleotides from the start codon. Analysis of the sequence immediately upstream of either S1 or S2 failed to reveal the presence of any known consensus promoter sequences. Although a sigma54 consensus sequence was identified in the region between S1 and S2, a corresponding transcript was not detected, and a rpoN mutant of R. meliloti was able to utilize 3-hydroxybutyrate as a sole carbon source. The R. meliloti bdhA gene is able to confer upon Escherichia coli the ability to utilize 3-hydroxybutyrate as a sole carbon source. An R. meliloti bdhA mutant accumulates poly-3-hydroxybutyrate to the same extent as the wild type and shows no symbiotic defects. Studies with a strain carrying a lacZ transcriptional fusion to bdhA demonstrated that gene expression is growth phase associated.

===== 15621424 | Characterization of bdhA, encoding the enzyme D-3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase, from Sinorhizobium sp. strain NGR234.
J: FEMS microbiology letters | Y: 2005 Jan 01 | DOI: 
A genomic library of Sinorhizobium sp. strain NGR234 was introduced into Escherichia coli LS5218, a strain with a constitutively active pathway for acetoacetate degradation, and clones that confer the ability to utilize D-3-hydroxybutyrate as a sole carbon source were isolated. Subcloning experiments identified a 2.3 kb EcoRI fragment that retained complementing ability, and an ORF that appeared orthologous with known bdhA genes was located within this fragment. The deduced NGR234 BdhA amino acid sequence revealed 91% identity to the Sinorhizobium meliloti BdhA. Site-directed insertion mutagenesis was performed by introduction of a OmegaSmSp cassette at a unique EcoRV site within the bdhA coding region. A NGR234 bdhA mutant, NGRPA2, was generated by homogenotization, utilizing the sacB gene-based lethal selection procedure. This mutant was devoid of D-3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase activity, and was unable to grow on D-3-hydroxybutyrate as sole carbon source. NGRPA2 exhibited symbiotic defects on Leucaena but not on Vigna, Macroptilium or Tephrosia host plants. Furthermore, the D-3-hydroxybutyrate utilization phenotype of NGRPA2 was suppressed by presence of plasmid-encoded multiple copies of the S. meliloti acsA2 gene. The glpK-bdhA-xdhA gene organization and the bdhA-xdhA operon arrangement observed in S. meliloti are also conserved in NGR234.

===== 9258668 | Megaplasmid and chromosomal loci for the PHB degradation pathway in Rhizobium (Sinorhizobium) meliloti.
J: Genetics | Y: 1997 Aug | DOI: 
Chromosomal and megaplasmid loci that affect the poly-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) degradation pathway in Rhizobium meliloti were identified. A clone that restores the ability of certain R. meliloti mutants with defined deletions in megaplasmid pRmeSU47b to use 3-hydroxybutyrate or acetoacetate as the sole carbon source was isolated from a cosmid library of R. meliloti genomic DNA. Tn5 insertion mutagenesis, followed by merodiploid complementation analysis, demonstrated that the locus consists of at least four transcriptional units, bhbA-D. We also identified loci involved in 3-hydroxybutyrate and/or acetoacetate utilization by screening for mutants that had lost the ability to use 3-hydroxybutyrate as the sole carbon source while retaining the ability to use acetate (thus ensuring an intact glyoxylate cycle and gluconeogenic pathway). These mutants fell into four classes, as determined by replicon mobilization experiments and genetic linkage in phage transduction; one class corresponded to the bhb locus on pRmeSU47b, two classes mapped to different regions on the chromosome and the fourth, bdhA, represented by a single mutant, mapped to another pRmeSU47b locus, near bacA. The bdhA mutant is deficient in 3-hydroxybutrate dehydrogenase activity.

===== 1989978 | Metabolism of poly(3-hydroxyalkanoates) (PHAs) by Pseudomonas oleovorans. Identification and sequences of genes and function of the encoded proteins in the synthesis and degradation of PHA.
J: The Journal of biological chemistry | Y: 1991 Feb 05 | DOI: 
Pseudomonas oleovorans accumulates poly(3-hydroxyalkanoates) (PHAs) after growth on medium chain length hydrocarbons. Large amounts of this polyester are synthesized when cells are grown under nitrogen-limiting conditions. When nitrogen is resupplied in the medium, the accumulated PHA is degraded. In this paper, we describe mutants which are defective in the synthesis or in the degradation of PHA. These mutants were used to select DNA fragments which encode PHA polymerases and a PHA depolymerase. A 25-kilobase (kb) DNA fragment was isolated from P. oleovorans that complements a Pseudomonas putida mutant unable to accumulate PHA. Subcloning resulted in the assignment of a 6.4-kb EcoRI fragment as the pha locus, containing genetic information for PHA synthesis. Mutants in the PHA degradation pathway were also complemented by this fragment, indicating that genes encoding PHA biosynthetic and degradative enzymes are clustered. Analysis of the DNA sequence of the 6.4-kb fragment revealed the presence of two open reading frames encoding PHA polymerases based on homology to the poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) polymerase from Alcaligenes eutrophus. A third open reading frame complemented the PHA degradation mutation and is likely to encode a PHA depolymerase. The presence of two PHA polymerases is due to a 2098-base pair DNA duplication. The PHA polymerases are 53% identical and show 35-40% identity to the poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) polymerase. No clear difference in specificity was found for the PHA polymerases. However, with the pha locus cloned on a multicopy vector, a polymer was accumulated that contains a significantly higher amount of substrate-derived monomers. An increase in the rate of polyester synthesis versus oxidation of the monomers in the beta-oxidation explains these findings.

===== 41055782 | Revealing the essential role of the lid in mclPHA intracellular depolymerase from Pseudomonas putida KT2440.
J: Applied microbiology and biotechnology | Y: 2025 Oct 07 | DOI: 10.1007/s00253-025-13605-z
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are microbial polyesters that serve as intracellular carbon reserves and represent promising biodegradable alternatives to conventional plastics. However, their large-scale application requires not only cost-effective production but also efficient strategies for recovery and recycling. Unlike short-chain-length PHAs, which are widely degraded by diverse enzymes, the intracellular degradation of medium-chain-length PHAs (mclPHAs) appears to be a genus-specific trait of Pseudomonas. In this context, the PhaZKT depolymerase from Pseudomonas putida KT2440 is considered a model enzyme for intracellular mclPHA mobilization; it is highly substrate-specific, acting almost exclusively on mclPHAs, and consists of an α/β-hydrolase fold with a lid domain, similar to lipases and other enzymes acting on lipid substrates, in contrast to extracellular PHA depolymerases, which generally lack this lid structure. Here, we explored the essential role of this lid structure through site-directed deletions and random mutagenesis. Targeted deletions within or near the lid completely abolished enzyme activity, highlighting its critical structural and functional importance. Random mutagenesis identified two beneficial variants: S184F, located in the lid hinge region, and G286R, situated in a still unmapped region. The S184F mutant exhibited increased esterase activity on p-nitrophenyl esters but significantly reduced depolymerase activity on mclPHA nanoparticles, indicating that lid integrity and dynamics precisely control substrate specificity and access. Molecular dynamics simulations supported these findings, revealing enhanced rigidity near the lid region in the S184F variant. Conversely, G286R showed substantially improved depolymerase activity toward mclPHA, suggesting alternative regions for beneficial mutations without compromising lid functionality. These results underscore the delicate balance between lid integrity and enzyme performance, offering insights into targeted protein engineering for optimized enzymatic recycling of bioplastics. KEY POINTS: • The lid in PhaZKT is essential for depolymerase activity • All lid-targeted mutants completely lost enzymatic activity • Random mutagenesis identified two active distal mutants.

===== 17170116 | Biochemical evidence that phaZ gene encodes a specific intracellular medium chain length polyhydroxyalkanoate depolymerase in Pseudomonas putida KT2442: characterization of a paradigmatic enzyme.
J: The Journal of biological chemistry | Y: 2007 Feb 16 | DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M608119200
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) can be catabolized by many microorganisms using intra- or extracellular PHA depolymerases. Most of our current knowledge of these intracellular enzyme-coding genes comes from the analysis of short chain length PHA depolymerases, whereas medium chain length PHA (mcl-PHA) intracellular depolymerization systems still remained to be characterized. The phaZ gene of some Pseudomonas putida strains has been identified only by mutagenesis and complementation techniques as putative intracellular mcl-PHA depolymerase. However, none of their corresponding encoded PhaZ enzymes have been characterized in depth. In this study the PhaZ depolymerase from P. putida KT2442 has been purified and biochemically characterized after its overexpression in Escherichia coli. To facilitate these studies we have developed a new and very sensitive radioactive method for detecting PHA hydrolysis in vitro. We have demonstrated that PhaZ is an intracellular depolymerase that is located in PHA granules and that hydrolyzes specifically mcl-PHAs containing aliphatic and aromatic monomers. The enzyme behaves as a serine hydrolase that is inhibited by phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. We have modeled the three-dimensional structure of PhaZ complexed with a 3-hydroxyoctanoate dimer. Using this model, we found that the enzyme appears to be built up from a corealpha/beta hydrolase-type domain capped with a lid structure with an active site containing a catalytic triad buried near the connection between domains. All these data constitute the first biochemical characterization of PhaZ and allow us to propose this enzyme as the paradigmatic representative of intracellular endo/exo-mcl-PHA depolymerases.

===== 15774885 | The presumptive magnetosome protein Mms16 is a poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) granule-bound protein (phasin) in Magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense.
J: Journal of bacteriology | Y: 2005 Apr | DOI: 
The Mms16 protein has been previously found to be associated with isolated magnetosomes from two Magnetospirillum strains. A function of this protein as a magnetosome-specific GTPase involved in the formation of intracellular magnetosome membrane vesicles was suggested. Here we present a study of the Mms16 protein from Magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense to clarify its function. Insertion-duplication mutagenesis of the mms16 gene did not affect the formation of magnetosome particles but resulted in the loss of the ability of M. gryphiswaldense cell extracts to activate poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerization in vitro, which was coincident with loss of the most abundant 16-kDa polypeptide from preparations of PHB granule-bound proteins. The mms16 mutation could be functionally complemented by enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP) fused to ApdA, which is a PHB granule-bound protein (phasin) in Rhodospirillum rubrum sharing 55% identity to Mms16. Fusions of Mms16 and ApdA to enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) or EYFP were colocalized in vivo with the PHB granules but not with the magnetosome particles after conjugative transfer to M. gryphiswaldense. Although the Mms16-EGFP fusion protein became detectable by Western analysis in all cell fractions upon cell disruption, it was predominantly associated with isolated PHB granules. Contrary to previous suggestions, our results argue against an essential role of Mms16 in magnetosome formation, and the previously observed magnetosome localization is likely an artifact due to unspecific adsorption during preparation. Instead, we conclude that Mms16 in vivo is a PHB granule-bound protein (phasin) and acts in vitro as an activator of PHB hydrolysis by R. rubrum PHB depolymerase PhaZ1. Accordingly, we suggest renaming the Mms16 protein of Magnetospirillum species to ApdA, as in R. rubrum.

===== 10416659 | Hydrolysis of native poly(hydroxybutyrate) granules (PHB), crystalline PHB, and artificial amorphous PHB granules by intracellular and extracellular depolymerases.
J: International journal of biological macromolecules | Y: 1999 | DOI: 
Native poly(hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) granules, purified PHB and artificial amorphous PHB granules were examined as putative substrates for hydrolysis by the intracellular depolymerase system of Rhodospirillum rubrum and the extracellular depolymerase of Pseudomonas lemoignei. The R. rubrum depolymerizing system requires pretreatment of granules with a heat stable 'activator' fraction; the activator can be replaced by mild trypsin treatment. Artificial granules were prepared with a cationic detergent, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and an anionic detergent, (sodium cholate). Cholate and CTAB PHB granules were hydrolyzed by both enzyme systems; however, some differences were noted. Cholate granules were hydrolyzed in the absence of the R. rubrum activator fraction. Activator was required for the hydrolysis of CTAB granules but could be replaced by heparin in the extracellular depolymerase system but not in the intracellular depolymerase system. A Triton X-114 extract of native PHB granules inhibited the hydrolysis of trypsin-activated granules by the intracellular depolymerase. The inhibition was reversed by the activator fraction. Detergent extracts of granules activated with the R. rubrum activator were unable to inhibit the hydrolysis of trypsin-activated granules. These data suggest that the activator acts to modify an inhibitor present on native granules.

===== 8837471 | Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerases bind to their substrate by a C-terminal located substrate binding site.
J: FEMS microbiology letters | Y: 1996 Oct 01 | DOI: 
Binding of (i) purified wild-type poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerase PhaZ4 of Pseudomonas lemoignei, (ii) a purified truncated form of PhaZ4, which lacked 55 C-terminal amino acids and (iii) commercial lactate dehydrogenase to aqueous suspensions of PHB, chitin or cellulose was studied. Only the wild-type PHB depolymerase was specifically able to bind to PHB granules. No other combination of protein and polymeric substrate resulted in polymer-bound protein. Similar results were obtained for other PHB depolymerases. We concluded that the C-terminal amino acids of PHB depolymerases represent a PHB-specific binding domain or at least an essential part of it.

===== 9585889 | The adsorption of substrate-binding domain of PHB depolymerases to the surface of poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid).
J: International journal of biological macromolecules | Y: 1998 Apr | DOI: 
The binding characteristic of PHB depolymerase has been studied by using glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion proteins with substrate-binding domain of three bacterial PHB depolymerases, Alcaligenes faecalis, Comamonas acidovorans and Comamonas testosteroni. Analysis using immuno-gold labeling technique and transmission electron microscopy indicated that a novel GST fusion protein derived from A. Faecalis enzyme adsorbed to the surface of poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid) (P(3HB)) single crystals like other fusion proteins. Comparison of inhibiting degree of P(3HB) powder hydrolysis activity of PHB depolymerase by fusion proteins indicated that three fusion proteins bind to P(3HB) powder in the same degree. The measurement of the surface hydrophobicity of proteins suggests that the interaction of the substrate-binding domain with insoluble P(3HB) may include not only a hydrophobic effect but also molecule-specific contacts.

===== 11710119 | Function of the catalytic domain of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase from Pseudomonas stutzeri.
J: Biomacromolecules | Y: 2000 | DOI: 
The mechanism of enzymatic hydrolysis for (R)-3-hydroxybutyrate (3HB) oligomers with poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate] [P(3HB)] depolymerase (PhaZpst) from Pseudomonas stutzeri was investigated by two deletion mutants lacking the substrate-binding domain and linker region, PhaZpst delta sbd and PhaZpstcore. The two deletion mutants had no ability for hydrolysis of water-insoluble P(3HB), while the hydrolysis activities of two deletion mutants for water-soluble 3HB oligomer and its derivatives (dimer, trimer, and tetramer) were identical with those of the wild type, indicating that the function of catalytic domain is independent of its substrate-binding domain and linker region. The hydrolyzed products analysis of 3HB oligomers by HPLC showed that the active site of catalytic domain recognizes at least two 3HB units for hydrolysis. The initial rates of hydrolysis of dimer derivative were lower by 2 orders of magnitude than those of trimer and tetramer derivatives, suggesting that 3HB oligomer derivatives larger than trimer are favorite substrates for PhaZpst.

===== 16963553 | Effects of mutations in the substrate-binding domain of poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate] (PHB) depolymerase from Ralstonia pickettii T1 on PHB degradation.
J: Applied and environmental microbiology | Y: 2006 Nov | DOI: 
Poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate] (PHB) depolymerase from Ralstonia pickettii T1 (PhaZ(RpiT1)) adsorbs to denatured PHB (dPHB) via its substrate-binding domain (SBD) to enhance dPHB degradation. To evaluate the amino acid residues participating in dPHB adsorption, PhaZ(RpiT1) was subjected to a high-throughput screening system consisting of PCR-mediated random mutagenesis targeted to the SBD gene and a plate assay to estimate the effects of mutations in the SBD on dPHB degradation by PhaZ(RpiT1). Genetic analysis of the isolated mutants with lowered activity showed that Ser, Tyr, Val, Ala, and Leu residues in the SBD were replaced by other residues at high frequency. Some of the mutant enzymes, which contained the residues replaced at high frequency, were applied to assays of dPHB degradation and adsorption, revealing that those residues are essential for full activity of both dPHB degradation and adsorption. These results suggested that PhaZ(RpiT1) adsorbs on the surface of dPHB not only via hydrogen bonds between hydroxyl groups of Ser in the enzyme and carbonyl groups in the PHB polymer but also via hydrophobic interaction between hydrophobic residues in the enzyme and methyl groups in the PHB polymer. The L441H enzyme, which displayed lower dPHB degradation and adsorption abilities, was purified and applied to a dPHB degradation assay to compare it with the wild-type enzyme. The kinetic analysis of the dPHB degradation suggested that lowering the affinity of the SBD towards dPHB causes a decrease in the dPHB degradation rate without the loss of its hydrolytic activity for the polymer chain.

===== 20058938 | Degradation and adsorption characteristics of PHB depolymerase as revealed by kinetics of mutant enzymes with amino acid substitution in substrate-binding domain.
J: Biomacromolecules | Y: 2010 Jan 11 | DOI: 10.1021/bm900967a
Extracelluar Poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate] (PHB) depolymerase (PhaZ(RpiT1)) from Ralstonia pickettii T1 adsorbs to PHB surface via its substrate-binding domain (SBD) to enhance PHB degradation. Our previous study combining PCR random mutagenesis with the determination of PHB degradation levels of mutant enzymes suggested that Ser, Tyr, Val, Ala, and Leu residues in SBD are probably involved in the enzymatic adsorption to and degradation of PHB. In the present study, the effects of mutations at Leu441, Tyr443, and Ser445 on PHB degradation were investigated because these residues were predicted to form a beta-sheet structure and orient in the same direction to interact possibly directly with the PHB surface. Purified L441H, Y443H, and S445C mutant enzymes were prepared, and their CD spectra and hydrolytic activities for water-soluble substrates were found to be identical to those of wild-type enzyme, indicating that these mutations have no influence on their structures and their ability to cleave the ester bond. In contrast, the PHB-degrading activity of these mutants differed from that of the wild type: L441H and Y443H enzymes had lower PHB-degrading activity than their wild-type counterpart, whereas S445C had higher activity. Kinetic analysis of PHB degradation by the mutants suggested that the hydrophobic residues at these positions are important for the enzyme adsorption to the PHB surface, and such substitutions as Y443H and S445C may more effectively disrupt the PHB surface to enhance the hydrolysis of PHB polymer chains than the wild-type enzyme. Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) analysis revealed that the three substitutions mentioned above altered the association phase rather than the dissociation phase in the enzyme adsorption to the polymer surface.

===== 10408639 | Substrate and binding specificities of bacterial polyhydroxybutyrate depolymerases.
J: International journal of biological macromolecules | Y: 1999 May | DOI: 
The substrate specificities of three extracellular polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) depolymerases from Alcaligenes faecalis (PhaZ Afa), Pseudomonas stutzeri (PhaZ Pst), and Comamonas acidovorans (PhaZ Cac), which are grouped into types A and B based on the position of a lipase box sequence in the catalytic domain, were examined for films of 12 different aliphatic polyesters. Each of these PHB depolymerases used was capable of hydrolyzing poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (P(3HB)), poly(3-hydroxypropionate) (P(3HP)), poly(4-hydroxybutyrate) (P(4HB)), poly(ethylene succinate) (PESU), and poly(ethylene adipate) (PEA) but could not hydrolyze another seven polyesters. In addition, the binding characteristics of substrate binding domains from PhaZ Afa, PhaZ Cac, and PHB depolymerase from Comamonas testosteroni (PhaZ Cte) were studied by using fusions with glutathione S-transferase (GST). All of fusion proteins adsorbed strongly on the surfaces of polyester granules of P(3HB), P(3HP), and poly(2-hydroxypropionate) (P(2HP)) which was not hydrolyzed by the PHB depolymerases used in this study, while they did not bind on Avicel and chitin granules. The adsorption kinetics of the fusion proteins to the surface of P(3HB) and P(2HP) granules were found to obey the Langmuir isotherm. The cross-area per molecule of fusion protein bound to P(3HB) granules was estimated to be 12+/-4 nm2/molecule. It has been suggested that the active sites in catalytic domains of PHB depolymerases have a similar conformational structure, and that several amino acids in substrate-binding domains of PHB depolymerases interact specifically with the surface of polyesters.

