===== 21948827 | Identification and characterization of a novel class of extracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase from Bacillus sp. strain NRRL B-14911.
J: Applied and environmental microbiology | Y: 2011 Nov | DOI: 10.1128/AEM.06069-11
The catalytic, linker, and denatured poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (dPHB)-binding domains of bacterial extracellular PHB depolymerases (PhaZs) are classified into several different types. We now report a novel class of extracellular PHB depolymerase from Bacillus sp. strain NRRL B-14911. Its catalytic domain belongs to type 1, whereas its putative linker region neither possesses the sequence features of the three known types of linker domains nor exhibits significant amino acid sequence similarity to them. Instead, this putative linker region can be divided into two distinct linker domains of novel types: LD1 and LD2. LD1 shows significant amino acid sequence similarity to certain regions of a large group of PHB depolymerase-unrelated proteins. LD2 and its homologs are present in a small group of PhaZs. The remaining C-terminal portion of this PhaZ can be further divided into two distinct domains: SBD1 and SBD2. Each domain showed strong binding to dPHB, and there is no significant sequence similarity between them. Each domain neither possesses the sequence features of the two known types of dPHB-binding domains nor shows significant amino acid sequence similarity to them. These unique features indicate the presence of two novel and distinct types of dPHB-binding domains. Homologs of these novel domains also are present in the extracellular PhaZ of Bacillus megaterium and the putative extracellular PhaZs of Bacillus pseudofirmus and Bacillus sp. strain SG-1. The Bacillus sp. NRRL B-14911 PhaZ appears to be a representative of a novel class of extracellular PHB depolymerases.

===== 40500476 | Identification of an Extracellular Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) Depolymerase in the Genus Alteromonas and Its Phylogenetic Distribution Among Alteromonas Species.
J: Marine biotechnology (New York, N.Y.) | Y: 2025 Jun 11 | DOI: 10.1007/s10126-025-10477-2
Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate), P(3HB), is an aliphatic polyester that is susceptible to biodegradation even in marine environments. The high biodegradability of P(3HB) can be attributed to the presence in the environment of extracellular P(3HB) depolymerase (PhaZ), the initial enzyme involved in P(3HB) degradation. In this study, we aimed to identify the gene encoding PhaZ in the marine P(3HB)-degrading bacterium Alteromonas sp. D210916BOD_24, which was previously isolated. First, we conducted genome analysis of the strain, revealing that the strain possesses a PhaZ homolog. It possesses a catalytic domain with a lipase box near the center, a substrate-binding domain comprising two regions, and a fibronectin type III linker domain, which fit the marine bacterial domain pattern. Disruption of the PhaZ homolog gene caused the strain to lose its P(3HB) degradation ability. The recombinant PhaZ homolog protein exhibited significant activity toward P(3HB). The results indicated that the PhaZ homolog indeed functions as PhaZ in Alteromonas sp. D210916BOD_24. Furthermore, we focused on the distribution and genomic placement of PhaZ homolog genes. The PhaZ homolog was present in 4/20 Alteromonas strains examined, with Alteromonas sp. D210916BOD_24 showing substantial divergence from the other three strains in the 16S rDNA-based phylogenetic tree. The gene arrangement around the PhaZ homolog gene was clearly different between Alteromonas sp. D210916BOD_24 and the others. Additionally, large-scale gene locations and orientations exhibited considerable differences. These findings suggest that the horizontal transfer of PhaZ homolog genes occurred after a certain degree of species division.

===== 19214501 | An extracellular polyhydroxybutyrate depolymerase in Thermus thermophilus HB8.
J: Applied microbiology and biotechnology | Y: 2009 Jun | DOI: 10.1007/s00253-008-1842-2
The thermophilic bacterium Thermus thermophilus HB8 has been characterized as a polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB)-degrading microorganism since it grows efficiently and forms clear zones on agar plates containing PHB as sole carbon source. T. thermophilus extracellular PHB depolymerase was purified to homogeneity using an affinity chromatography protocol. The purified enzyme was estimated to have an apparent molecular mass of 42 kDa. The extracellular PHB depolymerase gene was identified as the TTHA0199 gene product of T. thermophilus HB8. The amino acid sequence of the TTHA0199 gene product shared significant homologies to other carboxylesterases. A catalytic triad was identified consisting of S(183), E(310), and H(405). A pentapeptide sequence (GX(1)SX(2)G) exists within the molecule, characteristic for PHB depolymerases (lipase box) and for other serine hydrolases. Purified extracellular PHB depolymerase was stable at high temperatures with an optimum activity at pH 8.0. The apparent Km value of the purified enzyme for PHB was 53 microg/ml. As the main product of the enzymic hydrolysis of PHB, the monomer 3-hydroxybutyrate was identified, suggesting that the enzyme acts principally as an exo-type hydrolase.

===== 36222314 | Bioplastic degradation by a polyhydroxybutyrate depolymerase from a thermophilic soil bacterium.
J: Protein science : a publication of the Protein Society | Y: 2022 Nov | DOI: 10.1002/pro.4470
As the epidemic of single-use plastic worsens, it has become critical to identify fully renewable plastics such as those that can be degraded using enzymes. Here we describe the structure and biochemistry of an alkaline poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyric acid] (PHB) depolymerase from the soil thermophile Lihuaxuella thermophila. Like other PHB depolymerases or PHBases, the Lihuaxuella enzyme is active against several different polyhydroxyalkanoates, including homo- and heteropolymers, but L. thermophila PHB depolymerase (LtPHBase) is unique in that it also hydrolyzes polylactic acid and polycaprolactone. LtPHBase exhibits optimal activity at 70°C, and retains 88% of activity upon incubation at 65°C for 3 days. The 1.2 Å resolution crystal structure reveals an α/β-hydrolase fold typical of PHBases, but with a shallow active site containing the catalytic Ser-His-Asp-triad that appears poised for broad substrate specificity. LtPHBase holds promise for the depolymerization of PHB and related bioplastics at high temperature, as would be required in bioindustrial operations like recycling or landfill management.

===== 16614903 | A novel PHB depolymerase from a thermophilic Streptomyces sp.
J: Biotechnology letters | Y: 2006 Mar | DOI: 
A novel PHB depolymerase from a thermophilic Streptomyces sp. MG was purified to homogeneity by hydrophobic interaction chromatography and gel filtration. The molecular mass of the purified enzyme was 43 kDa as determined by size exclusion chromatography and 41 kDa by SDS-PAGE. The optimum pH and temperature were 8.5 and 60 degrees C respectively. The enzyme was stable at 50 degrees C and from pH 6.5-8.5. The enzyme hydrolyzed not only bacterial polyesters, i.e. poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid and poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate), but also synthetic, aliphatic polyesters such as polypropiolactone, poly(ethylene adipate) and poly(ethylene succinate).

===== 15340791 | Thermotolerant poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)-degrading bacteria from hot compost and characterization of the PHB depolymerase of Schlegelella sp. KB1a.
J: Archives of microbiology | Y: 2004 Oct | DOI: 
Eighteen gram-negative thermotolerant poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB)-degrading bacterial isolates ( T(max) approximately 60 degrees C) were obtained from compost. Isolates produced clearing zones on opaque PHB agar, indicating the presence of extracellular PHB depolymerases. Comparison of physiological characteristics and determination of 16S rRNA gene sequences of four selected isolates revealed a close relatedness of three isolates (SA8, SA1, and KA1) to each other and to Schlegelella thermodepolymerans and Caenibacterium thermophilum. The fourth strain, isolate KB1a, showed reduced similarities to the above-mentioned isolates and species and might represent a new species of Schlegelella. Evidence is provided that S. thermodepolymerans and C. thermophilum are only one species. The PHB depolymerase gene, phaZ, of isolate KB1a was cloned and functionally expressed in Escherichia coli. Purified PHB depolymerase was most active around pH 10 and 76 degrees C. The DNA-deduced amino acid sequence of the mature protein (49.4 kDa) shared significant homologies to other extracellular PHB depolymerases with a domain substructure: catalytic domain type 2-linker domain fibronectin type 3-substrate-binding domain type 1. A catalytic triad consisting of S(20), D(104), and H(138) and a pentapeptide sequence (GLS(20)AG) characteristic for PHB depolymerases (PHB depolymerase box, GLSXG) and for other serine hydrolases (lipase box, GXSXG) were identified.

===== 9406404 | Biochemical and molecular characterization of the polyhydroxybutyrate depolymerase of Comamonas acidovorans YM1609, isolated from freshwater.
J: Applied and environmental microbiology | Y: 1997 Dec | DOI: 
Comamonas acidovorans YM1609 secreted a polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) depolymerase into the culture supernatant when it was cultivated on poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) [P(3HB)] or poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) [P(3HB-co-3HV)] as the sole carbon source. The PHB depolymerase was purified from culture supernatant of C. acidovorans by two chromatographic methods, and its molecular mass was determined as 45,000 Da by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in the presence of sodium dodecyl sulfate. The enzyme was stable at temperatures below 37 degrees C and at pH values of 6 to 10, and its activity was inhibited by diisopropyl fluorophosphonate. The liquid chromatography analysis of water-soluble products revealed that the primary product of enzymatic hydrolysis of P(3HB) was a dimer of 3-hydroxybutyric acid. Kinetics of enzymatic hydrolysis of P(3HB) film were studied. In addition, a gene encoding the PHB depolymerase was cloned from the C. acidovorans genomic library. The nucleotide sequence of this gene was found to encode a protein of 494 amino acids (M(r), 51,018 Da). Furthermore, by analysis of the N-terminal amino acid sequence of the purified enzyme, the molecular mass of the mature enzyme was calculated to be 48,628 Da. Analysis of the deduced amino acid sequence suggested a domain structure of the protein containing a catalytic domain, fibronectin type III module as linker, and a putative substrate-binding domain. Electron microscopic visualization of the mixture of P(3HB) single crystals and a fusion protein of putative substrate-binding domain with glutathione S-transferase demonstrated that the fusion protein adsorbed strongly and homogeneously to the surfaces of P(3HB) single crystals.

===== 9297825 | Cloning of the gene for poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid) depolymerase of Comamonas testosteroni and functional analysis of its substrate-binding domain.
J: FEMS microbiology letters | Y: 1997 Sep 01 | DOI: 
A poly(3-hydroxybutyric acid) (PHB) depolymerase gene of Comamonas testosteroni YM1004 was cloned on Sau3AI fragment from genomic DNA into Escherichia coli DH5. Nucleotide sequence analysis dedicated a 1539 bp open reading frame encoding a protein 513 amino acid with a putative 25 residue signal peptide for secretion. The deduced amino acid sequence was very similar to that of PHB depolymerase of Comamonas sp. In order to understand the characteristics of substrate-binding domain of the depolymerase, we constructed its glutathione S-transferase (GST) fusion protein and investigated the ability of adsorption on PHB single crystals by using gold-conjugated antibody and transmission electron microscopy. The fusion protein adsorbed on PHB single crystals tightly and homogeneously, suggesting that binding domain contributes to the adsorption of enzyme on solid PHB without site specificity.

===== 7606660 | Characterization of the extracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase of Comamonas sp. and of its structural gene.
J: Canadian journal of microbiology | Y: 1995 | DOI: 
The poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerase structural gene of Comamonas sp. (phaZCsp) was cloned in Escherichia coli and identified by halo formation on PHB-containing solid medium. The nucleotide sequence of a 1719 base pair MboI fragment was determined and contained one large open reading frame (ORF1, 1542 base pairs). This open reading frame encoded the precursor of the PHB depolymerase (514 amino acids; Mr, 53,095), and the deduced amino acid sequence was in agreement with the N-terminal amino acid sequence of the purified PHB depolymerase from amino acid 26 onwards. Analysis of the deduced amino acid sequence revealed a domain structure of the protein: a signal peptide that was 25 amino acids long was followed by a catalytic domain of about 300 amino acids, a fibronectin type III (Fn3) modul sequence, and a putative PHB-specific substrate-binding site. By comparison of the primary structure with that of other polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) depolymerases, the catalytic domain apparently contained a catalytic triad of serine, histidine, and aspartate. In addition, a conserved region resembling the oxyanion hole of lipases was present. The catalytic domain was linked to a C-terminal putative substrate-binding site by a sequence about 90 amino acids long resembling the Fn3 modul of fibronectin and other eukaryotic extracellular matrix proteins. A threonine-rich region, which was found in four of five PHA depolymerases of Pseudomonas lemoignei, was not present in the Comamonas sp. depolymerase. The similarities with and differences from other PHA depolymerases are discussed.

===== 9872779 | Cloning and characterization of the polyhydroxybutyrate depolymerase gene of Pseudomonas stutzeri and analysis of the function of substrate-binding domains.
J: Applied and environmental microbiology | Y: 1999 Jan | DOI: 
The extracellular polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) depolymerase gene (phaZPst) of Pseudomonas stutzeri was cloned and sequenced. phaZPst was composed of 1,728 bp encoding a protein of 576 amino acids. Analyses of the N-terminal amino acid sequence and the matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrum of the purified enzyme showed that the mature enzyme consisted of 538 amino acids with a deduced molecular mass of 57,506 Da. Analysis of the deduced amino acid sequence of the protein revealed a domain structure containing a catalytic domain, putative linker region, and two putative substrate-binding domains (SBDI and SBDII). The putative linker region was similar to the repeating units of the cadherin-like domain of chitinase A from Vibrio harveyi and chitinase B from Clostridium paraputrificum. The binding characteristics of SBDs to poly([R]-3-hydroxybutyrate) [P(3HB)] and chitin granules were characterized by using fusion proteins of SBDs with glutathione S-transferase (GST). These GST fusion proteins with SBDII and SBDI showed binding activity toward P(3HB) granules but did not bind on chitin granules. It has been suggested that the SBDs of the depolymerase interact specifically with the surface of P(3HB). In addition, a kinetic analysis for the enzymatic hydrolysis of 3-hydroxybutyrate oligomers of various sizes has suggested that the catalytic domain of the enzyme recognizes at least two monomeric units as substrates.

===== 14607367 | Cloning, expression and characterization of a poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase from Marinobacter sp. NK-1.
J: International journal of biological macromolecules | Y: 2003 Dec | DOI: 
A DNA fragment carrying the gene encoding poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (P(3HB)) depolymerase was cloned from the genomic DNA of Marinobacter sp. DNA sequencing analysis revealed that the Marinobacter sp. P(3HB) depolymerase gene is composed of 1734bp and encodes 578 amino acids with a molecular mass of 61,757Da. A sequence homology search showed that the deduced protein contains the signal peptide, catalytic domain (CD), cadherin-type linker domain (LD), and two substrate-binding domain (SBD). The fusion proteins of glutathione S-transferase (GST) with the CD showed the hydrolytic activity for denatured P(3HB) (dP(3HB)), P(3HB) emulsion (eP(3HB)) and p-nitrophenylbutyrate. On the other hand, the fusion proteins lacking the SBD showed much lower hydrolytic activity for dP(3HB) compared to the proteins containing both CD and SBD. In addition, binding tests revealed that the SBDs are specifically bound not to eP(3HB) but dP(3HB). These suggest that the SBDs play a crucial role in the enzymatic hydrolysis of dP(3HB) that is a solid substrate.

===== 26664741 | Extracellular Polyhydroxyalkanoate Depolymerase by Acidovorax sp. DP5.
J: Enzyme research | Y: 2015 | DOI: 10.1155/2015/212159
Bacteria capable of degrading polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) by secreting extracellular depolymerase enzymes were isolated from water and soil samples collected from various environments in Malaysia. A total of 8 potential degraders exhibited clear zones on poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) [P(3HB)] based agar, indicating the presence of extracellular PHA depolymerase. Among the isolates, DP5 exhibited the largest clearing zone with a degradation index of 6.0. The highest degradation activity of P(3HB) was also observed with depolymerase enzyme of DP5 in mineral salt medium containing P(3HB). Based on biochemical characterization and 16S rRNA cloning and sequencing, isolate DP5 was found to belong to the genus Acidovorax and subsequently named as Acidovorax sp. DP5. The highest extracellular depolymerase enzyme activity was achieved when 0.25% (w/v) of P(3HB) and 1 g/L of urea were used as carbon and nitrogen source, respectively, in the culture media. The most suitable assay condition of the depolymerase enzyme in response to pH and temperature was tested. The depolymerase produced by strain Acidovorax sp. DP5 showed high percentage of degradation with P(3HB) films in an alkaline condition with pH 9 and at a temperature of 40°C.

===== 23951224 | Novel extracellular PHB depolymerase from Streptomyces ascomycinicus: PHB copolymers degradation in acidic conditions.
J: PloS one | Y: 2013 | DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071699
The ascomycin-producer strain Streptomyces ascomycinicus has been proven to be an extracellular poly(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) degrader. The fkbU gene, encoding a PHB depolymerase (PhaZ Sa ), has been cloned in E. coli and Rhodococcus sp. T104 strains for gene expression. Gram-positive host Rhodococcus sp. T104 was able to produce and secrete to the extracellular medium an active protein form. PhaZ Sa was purified by two hydrophobic interaction chromatographic steps, and afterwards was biochemically as well as structurally characterized. The enzyme was found to be a monomer with a molecular mass of 48.4 kDa, and displayed highest activity at 45°C and pH 6, thus being the first PHB depolymerase from a gram-positive bacterium presenting an acidic pH optimum. The PHB depolymerase activity of PhaZ Sa was increased in the presence of divalent cations due to non-essential activation, and also in the presence of methyl-β-cyclodextrin and PEG 3350. Protein structure was analyzed, revealing a globular shape with an alpha-beta hydrolase fold. The amino acids comprising the catalytic triad, Ser(131)-Asp(209)-His(269), were identified by multiple sequence alignment, chemical modification of amino acids and site-directed mutagenesis. These structural results supported the proposal of a three-dimensional model for this depolymerase. PhaZ Sa was able to degrade PHB, but also demonstrated its ability to degrade films made of PHB, PHBV copolymers and a blend of PHB and starch (7∶3 proportion wt/wt). The features shown by PhaZ Sa make it an interesting candidate for industrial applications involving PHB degradation.

===== 22865072 | Characterization of a novel subgroup of extracellular medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoate depolymerases from actinobacteria.
J: Applied and environmental microbiology | Y: 2012 Oct | DOI: 
Nineteen medium-chain-length (mcl) poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) (PHA)-degrading microorganisms were isolated from natural sources. From them, seven Gram-positive and three Gram-negative bacteria were identified. The ability of these microorganisms to hydrolyze other biodegradable plastics, such as short-chain-length (scl) PHA, poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL), poly(ethylene succinate) (PES), and poly(l-lactide) (PLA), has been studied. On the basis of the great ability to degrade different polyesters, Streptomyces roseolus SL3 was selected, and its extracellular depolymerase was biochemically characterized. The enzyme consisted of one polypeptide chain of 28 kDa with a pI value of 5.2. Its maximum activity was observed at pH 9.5 with chromogenic substrates. The purified enzyme hydrolyzed mcl PHA and PCL but not scl PHA, PES, and PLA. Moreover, the mcl PHA depolymerase can hydrolyze various substrates for esterases, such as tributyrin and p-nitrophenyl (pNP)-alkanoates, with its maximum activity being measured with pNP-octanoate. Interestingly, when poly(3-hydroxyoctanoate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate [11%]) was used as the substrate, the main hydrolysis product was the monomer (R)-3-hydroxyoctanoate. In addition, the genes of several Actinobacteria strains, including S. roseolus SL3, were identified on the basis of the peptide de novo sequencing of the Streptomyces venezuelae SO1 mcl PHA depolymerase by tandem mass spectrometry. These enzymes did not show significant similarity to mcl PHA depolymerases characterized previously. Our results suggest that these distinct enzymes might represent a new subgroup of mcl PHA depolymerases.

===== 26156240 | Novel extracellular medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoate depolymerase from Streptomyces exfoliatus K10 DSMZ 41693: a promising biocatalyst for the efficient degradation of natural and functionalized mcl-PHAs.
J: Applied microbiology and biotechnology | Y: 2015 Nov | DOI: 10.1007/s00253-015-6780-1
Cloning and biochemical characterization of a novel extracellular medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoate (mcl-PHA) depolymerase from Streptomyces exfoliatus K10 DSMZ 41693 are described. The primary structure of the depolymerase (PhaZSex2) includes the lipase consensus sequence (serine-histidine-aspartic acid) which is known for serine hydrolases. Secondary structure analysis shows 7.9 % α-helix, 43.9 % β-sheet, 19.4 % β-turns, and 31.2 % random coil, suggesting that this enzyme belongs to the α/β hydrolase fold family, in agreement with other PHA depolymerases and lipases. The enzyme was efficiently produced as an extracellular active form in Rhodococcus and purified by two consecutive hydrophobic chromatographic steps. Matrix-assisted laser desorption-time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) analysis of the purified enzyme revealed a monomer of 27.6 kDa with a midpoint transition temperature of 44.2 °C. Remarkably, the activity is significantly enhanced by low concentrations of nonionic and anionic detergents and thermal stability is improved by the presence of 10 % glycerol. PhaZSex2 is an endo-exohydrolase that cleaves both large and small PHA molecules, producing (R)-3-hydroxyoctanoic acid monomers as the main reaction product. Markedly, PhaZSex2 is able to degrade functionalized polymers containing thioester groups in the side chain (PHACOS), releasing functional thioester-based monomers and oligomers demonstrating the potentiality of this novel biocatalyst for the industrial production of enantiopure (R)-3-hydroxyalkanoic acids.

===== 12785312 | Characterization of an extracellular medium-chain-length poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) depolymerase from Streptomyces sp. KJ-72.
J: Antonie van Leeuwenhoek | Y: 2003 | DOI: 
A bacterial strain capable of degrading medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoates (MCL-PHAs) was isolated from a soil sample. This organism, which was identified as Streptomyces sp. KJ-72, secreted MCL-PHA depolymerase into the culture fluid only when it was cultivated on MCL-PHAs. The extracellular MCL-PHA depolymerase of the organism was purified to electrophoretic homogeneity by ion exchange column chromatography and gel filtration. The enzyme consisted of a monomeric subunit having a molecular mass of 27.1 kDa and isoelectric point of 4.7. The maximum activity was observed at pH 8.7 and 50 degrees C. The enzyme was sensitive to N-bromosuccinimide and acetic anhydride, indicating the presence of tryptophan and lysine residues in the catalytic domain. The enzyme was able to hydrolyze various chain-length p-nitrophenyl esters of fatty acids and polycaprolactone as well as various types of MCL-PHAs. However, lipase activity of the enzyme was not detected. The main hydrolysis product of poly(3-hydroxyheptanoate) was identified to be the dimer of 3-hydroxyheptanoate.

===== 11888314 | Characterization of an extracellular medium-chain-length poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) depolymerase from Pseudomonas alcaligenes LB19.
J: Biomacromolecules | Y: 2002 | DOI: 
An extracellular medium-chain-length poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate) (MCL-PHA) depolymerase from an isolate, Pseudomonas alcaligenes LB19, was purified to electrophoretic homogeneity by hydrophobic interaction chromatography using Octyl-Sepharose CL-4B and gel permeation chromatography using Sephadex G-150. The molecular mass of the enzyme, which consisted of a single polypeptide chain, was approximately 27.6 kDa. The pI value of the enzyme was estimated to be 5.7, and its maximum activity was observed at pH 9.0 and 45 degreesC. The enzyme was significantly inactivated by EDTA and phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) but insensitive to dithiothreitol. It was also markedly inhibited by 0.1% Tween 80 and 0.05% Triton X-100. The purified enzyme could hydrolyze various types of bacterial aliphatic and aromatic MCL-PHAs but not poly(3-hydroxybutyrate), polycaprolactone, and poly(L-lactide). Biodegradation rates of the aromatic MCL-PHAs were significantly lower than those of the aliphatic MCL-PHAs, regardless of the compositions and types of aromatic substituents. It was able to hydrolyze medium-chain-length p-nitrophenylalkanoates more efficiently than the shorter-chain forms. The main hydrolysis products of poly(3-hydroxynonanoate) were identified as monomer units. The results demonstrated in this study suggest that the MCL-PHA depolymerase from P. alcaligenes LB19 is a distinct enzyme, which are different from those of other MCL-PHA degrading bacteria in its quaternary structure, pI value, sensitivity to EDTA and PMSF, and hydrolysis products of MCL-PHA.

===== 16232726 | Purification and characterization of extracellular medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoate depolymerase from Pseudomonas sp. RY-1.
J: Journal of bioscience and bioengineering | Y: 2000 | DOI: 
A novel bacterial strain capable of growing in a medium containing a medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoate (MCL-PHA) as the sole carbon source was isolated from a soil sample. The isolate, which was identified as Pseudomonas sp. RY-1, secreted MCL-PHA depolymerase into the culture fluid only when it was cultivated in a medium containing a MCL-PHA, such as polyhydroxyoctanoate (PHO) or polyhydroxynonanoate (PHN). The extracellular MCL-PHA depolymerase of this organism was purified to electrophoretic homogeneity. The enzyme was a tetramer with identical subunits and a total molecular mass of 115 kDa. The isoelectric point of this enzyme was estimated to be 5.9 by isoelectric focusing. The maximal activity was observed at pH 8.5 and 35 degrees C. The enzyme was insensitive to phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride and dithiothreitol, unlike other short-chain-length (SCL) PHA depolymerases. The K(m) values for PHO and PHN were 0.86 and 1.47 mg/ml, respectively. The enzyme could not hydrolyze SCL-PHAs and p-nitrophenyl esters of fatty acids.

===== 10772473 | Characterization of an extracellular poly(3-hydroxy-5-phenylvalerate) depolymerase from Xanthomonas sp. JS02.
J: Applied microbiology and biotechnology | Y: 2000 Mar | DOI: 
A bacterium, JS02, capable of degrading an aromatic medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA(MCL)), poly(3-hydroxy-5-phenylvalerate) (PHPV), was isolated from wastewater-treatment sludge (Ju et al. 1998), and was identified as a Xanthomonas species. An extracellular PHPV depolymerase was purified from the concentrated culture broth of Xanthomonas sp. JS02 by using a chromatography series on Sephadex G-75, QAE-Sephadex A-50 and hydroxyapatite. The molecular mass of the purified enzyme was estimated to be 41.7 kDa. The purified enzyme could hydrolyse PHPV and p-nitrophenyl (PNP)-esters of fatty acids, but did not hydrolyse short-chain-length PHAs, though the culture supernatant could hydrolyse them. The optimum pH range was 8.0-9.0 and the optimum temperature was 60 degrees C for PNP-octanoate hydrolysis. The Km values for PNP-hexanoate and PNP-octanoate were 10.9 and 0.88 microM, respectively.

===== 22706067 | Identification and biochemical evidence of a medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoate depolymerase in the Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus predatory hydrolytic arsenal.
J: Applied and environmental microbiology | Y: 2012 Sep | DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01099-12
The obligate predator Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus HD100 shows a large set of proteases and other hydrolases as part of its hydrolytic arsenal needed for its predatory life cycle. We present genetic and biochemical evidence that open reading frame (ORF) Bd3709 of B. bacteriovorus HD100 encodes a novel medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoate (mcl-PHA) depolymerase (PhaZ(Bd)). The primary structure of PhaZ(Bd) suggests that this enzyme belongs to the α/β-hydrolase fold family and has a typical serine hydrolase catalytic triad (serine-histidine-aspartic acid) in agreement with other PHA depolymerases and lipases. PhaZ(Bd) has been extracellularly produced using different hypersecretor Tol-pal mutants of Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas putida as recombinant hosts. The recombinant PhaZ(Bd) has been characterized, and its biochemical properties have been compared to those of other PHA depolymerases. The enzyme behaves as a serine hydrolase that is inhibited by phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride. It is also affected by the reducing agent dithiothreitol and nonionic detergents like Tween 80. PhaZ(Bd) is an endoexohydrolase that cleaves both large and small PHA molecules, producing mainly dimers but also monomers and trimers. The enzyme specifically degrades mcl-PHA and is inactive toward short-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoates (scl-PHA) like polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB). These studies shed light on the potentiality of these predators as sources of new biocatalysts, such as an mcl-PHA depolymerase, for the production of enantiopure hydroxyalkanoic acids and oligomers as building blocks for the synthesis of biobased polymers.

===== 41173112 | Functional characterization and domain shuffling of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerases from Cupriavidus malaysiensis and Pseudomonas guguanensis for sustainable bioplastic degradation.
J: Bioresource technology | Y: 2026 Feb | DOI: 10.1016/j.biortech.2025.133571
Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) depolymerases (PHBds) enable bioplastic degradation into reusable monomers, making them essential for sustainable waste management and circular bioeconomy solutions. In this study, we computationally identified and characterized two new PHBds from Cupriavidus malaysiensis (CmaPHBd) and from Pseudomonas guguanensis (PguPHBd). Sequence analysis revealed that both enzymes are classified as extracellular type I depolymerases, containing a conserved N-terminal catalytic domain (CD) and a C-terminal substrate-binding domain (SBD). Recombinant expression in E. coli enabled purification and biochemical characterization of CmaPHBd and PguPHBd. The results demonstrated that CmaPHBd was most active in acidic conditions (pH 5.0-6.0), while PguPHBd exhibited optimum activity in alkaline conditions (pH 9.5). Differential scanning fluorimetry (DSF) analysis indicated a melting temperature (Tm) of 49.6 °C for CmaPHBd, while PguPHBd exhibited two unfolding transitions at 45.7 °C and 57.1 °C. Initial rate kinetics analysis indicated an allosteric regulation in both enzymes and significant substrate inhibition at high PHB concentrations. Among the two enzymes, CmaPHBd exhibited superior degradation efficiency towards solid PHB films. Furthermore, CmaPHBd displayed promiscuous activity against other solid polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) films. A domain-shuffling strategy was employed, to enhance the activity PguPHBd towards solid plastic films, by fusing the SBD of CmaPHBd to the CD of PguPHBd. The engineered variant, showed improved degradation efficiency on PHB and related biopolymers, confirming the critical role of SBD in overcoming the rate-limiting adsorption step towards solid plastic films. These findings provide valuable insights into the structural and functional properties of CmaPHBd and PguPHBd, highlighting their potential application in bioplastic degradation, reusability and biocatalysis.

===== 39310033 | Insights into the biodegradation of polyhydroxyalkanoates by the tropical marine isolate, 
J: 3 Biotech | Y: 2024 Oct | DOI: 10.1007/s13205-024-04079-3
UNLABELLED: In the current study, the ability of an indigenous marine Actinomycete Nocardiopsis dassonvillei (NCIM 5124) to degrade poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)-PHB was examined. From the whole genome sequencing data of the organism, information regarding the PHB depolymerase gene and amino acid sequence (Accession number: MCK9871921.1) was retrieved. In silico studies indicated the presence of a signal peptide characteristic of extracellular enzymes. ProtParam tool predicted that the protein had a molecular mass of 42.46 kDa with an isoelectric point of 4.51. Aliphatic and instability index values suggested that the protein was stable and the observed GARVY value indicated its hydrophilic nature. 3D structure prediction and multiple sequence alignments revealed the presence of Type I catalytic domain [including the oxyanion histidine towards the N terminal, the catalytic triad with serine (as a part of GLSAG pentapeptide), aspartate and histidine], substrate binding and linker domain. The organism was able to grow on PHB in solid and liquid media and effectively degrade it. Maximum enzyme activity (1.8 U/mL/min) was observed after 5 d of incubation in Bushnell Hass Medium containing 0.1% PHB, 1.5% sodium chloride, at 30 °C, pH 7.5 with agitation at 130 rpm. Application of the organism in disintegrating films of PHB and its copolymers was successfully demonstrated on the basis of weight loss and scanning electron microscope analysis. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on production of PHB depolymerase with high efficiency by N. dassonvillei, an organism that holds promise in degrading PHB-derived waste material.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s13205-024-04079-3.

===== 37855636 | Isolation and characterization of polyhydroxyalkanoate-degrading bacteria in seawater at two different depths from Suruga Bay.
J: Applied and environmental microbiology | Y: 2023 Nov 29 | DOI: 10.1128/aem.01488-23
Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) is a highly biodegradable microbial polyester, even in marine environments. In this study, we incorporated an enrichment culture-like approach in the process of isolating marine PHA-degrading bacteria. The resulting 91 isolates were suggested to fall into five genera (Alloalcanivorax, Alteromonas, Arenicella, Microbacterium, and Pseudoalteromonas) based on 16S rRNA analysis, including two novel genera (Arenicella and Microbacterium) as marine PHA-degrading bacteria. Microbacterium schleiferi (DSM 20489) and Alteromonas macleodii (NBRC 102226), the type strains closest to the several isolates, have an extracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) [P(3HB)] depolymerase homolog that does not fit a marine-type domain composition. However, A. macleodii exhibited no PHA degradation ability, unlike M. schleiferi. This result demonstrates that the isolated Alteromonas spp. are different species from A. macleodii. P(3HB) depolymerase homologs in the genus Alteromonas should be scrutinized in the future, particularly about which ones work as the depolymerase.

===== 39827799 | Metagenomic and metatranscriptomic analyses reveal uncharted microbial constituents responsible for polyhydroxybutyrate biodegradation in coastal waters.
J: Journal of hazardous materials | Y: 2025 Apr 05 | DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2025.137202
Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) has attracted attention as a representative polymer for biodegradable plastics produced by microorganisms. Since information regarding the fate of PHB released into the environment is limited, it is necessary to identify them based on metagenomic information. We estimated the PHB biodegradability in coastal water samples collected from 15 near shore sites around Japan using oxygen consumption as an indicator in laboratory-scale incubation experiments and conducted 16S rRNA gene-based microbial community profiling. The PHB-biodegradation-rate was significantly positively correlated with the diversity indices of the microbial community in seawater prior to incubation, indicating that seawater with higher diversity is more advantageous for biodegradation. We identified 41 operational taxonomic units exhibiting a significant positive correlation between their abundance and PHB-degradation-rates; these included several microorganisms with hitherto unreported PHB-degrading ability. Next, we analyzed gene expression patterns over incubation time using seawater samples employing metagenomic and metatranscriptomic approaches. Fifty-seven putative extracellular PHB/PHA depolymerase genes were found in 38 metagenomic bins and their expression changed with increasing biodegradation rates, indicating that PHB released into the marine environment is subject to degradation by phylogenetically diverse PHB-depolymerase-producing bacteria. These findings should contribute to expanding the knowledge on degradation of biodegradable plastics by complex marine microbial ecosystems.

===== 28324398 | Poly(-β-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerase PHAZ 
J: 3 Biotech | Y: 2015 Dec | DOI: 10.1007/s13205-015-0287-4
Very few studies have been dedicated to R-hydroxyacids (R-HA) production using extracellular polyhydroxyalkanoate depolymerases (ePhaZs). Penicillium expansum produced maximum extracellular polyhydroxybutyrate depolymerase (~6 U/mL) by 72 h when grown in mineral salt medium containing 0.2 % w/v PHB, pH 5.0, at 30 °C and 200 rpm shaking conditions. Partial purification of the extracellular poly(-β-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase PHAZ Pen from P. expansum by two steps using ammonium sulphate (80 % saturation) and affinity chromatography using concanavalin A yielded 22.76-fold purity and 43.15 % recovery of protein. The enzyme composed of a single polypeptide chain of apparent molecular mass of 20 kDa, as determined by SDS-PAGE, stained positive for glycoprotein by periodic-schiff base (PAS) staining. Optimum enzyme activity was detected between pH 4.0 and 6.0 at 45-50 °C with pH 5.0 and 50 °C supporting maximum activity. The enzyme was stable between pH 4.0 and 6.0 at 55 °C for 1 h with a residual activity of almost 70-80 %. The enzyme was completely inhibited by 1 mM DTT/1 mM HgCl2 and N-ethylmaleimide (10 mM) indicating the importance of essential disulphide bonds (cystine residues) and tyrosine for enzyme activity or probably for maintaining the native enzyme structure. Among the various divalent and trivalent metal ions, mercuric chloride, ferric citrate and ferrous sulphate inhibited enzyme activity. The enzyme showed substrate specificity towards only PHB and poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) and no other lipid or other p-nitrophenyl fatty acids or with polycaprolactone, showing that it was a true depolymerase and not any lipase or cutinase. Preliminary investigation revealed β-hydroxybutyrate as the end product of PHB hydrolysis by P. expansum, suggesting that the enzyme acted principally as an exo-type hydrolase. The above properties when compared with other fungal PHB depolymerases reported till date suggest the distinct nature of the PHB depolymerase of P. expansum.

===== 41151231 | Overexpression, biochemical characterization, and structural modeling of polyhydroxybutyrate depolymerase from Nocardiopsis dassonvillei.
J: Enzyme and microbial technology | Y: 2026 Feb | DOI: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2025.110767
The ability of Nocardiopsis dassonvillei NCIM 5124 to synthesize polyhydroxybutyrate depolymerase (PHBD) was recently reported. In this investigation, in vitro codon optimized gene synthesis, overexpression, and biochemical characterization of this enzyme along with molecular docking studies are presented. The sequence of the PHBD was inserted in pET-28a(+) along with the PelB_Signal and His6 tag to generate the recombinant vector pET-Nd-pelB_PHBD. The transformed Escherichia coli BL21(DE3) could produce active PHBD. This enzyme was purified using Ni-NTA affinity chromatography, producing a product with a molecular weight of roughly 50 kDa. The optimum temperature and pH of the recombinant enzyme were 35°C and 8.0, respectively. Triton X100 and Tween 20 inhibited the enzyme activity by 90 %, indicating the role of hydrophobic residues in the active site of the enzyme, as also noted during docking studies. On the basis of the Michaelis-Menten equation, apparent Km and Vmax of recombinant PHBD were found to be 1.782 mg/mL and 4.79 U/mL/min, respectively. Molecular docking studies indicated that the hydrophobic amino acids Cys 39, Ala 40, Cys 77, Phe 158, Met 161, Val 201, Ala 272, and Tyr 273 present in the catalytic site were providing the necessary hydrophobic environment for binding of the ligand. The purified enzyme could also degrade films of PHB and poly (3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate (PHBVH). As far as we are aware, this is the first report on the overexpression of PHBD from Nocardiopsis sp.

===== 41702408 | Study of Microbial Communities in the Soda Lake of Isabel Island: Identification of Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) Degrading Enzymes.
J: Environmental microbiology reports | Y: 2026 Feb | DOI: 10.1111/1758-2229.70279
Crater Lake (Isabel Island, Mexico) is a meromictic, stratified, haloalkaline system. To identify and characterise PHB depolymerases across the vertical physicochemical gradients of the lake, we analysed seven metagenomes from the water column (0-23 m), one sediment metagenome, and the genomes of two organisms (HB105m and VN105m) isolated from 5 m. Taxonomic profiles revealed vertical stratification: Actinobacteriota and Cyanobacteriota dominated surface waters, while Pseudomonadota, Bacillota, and Bacteroidota prevailed in deeper layers and sediments. Alpha-diversity indices peaked at 5 and 20 m and declined at 23 m. We identified 16 putative PHB depolymerases spanning a broader phylogenetic range than previously documented for haloalkaline ecosystems. These included homologues affiliated with Vreelandella, Thiomicrorhabdus, Chloroflexota, Candidatus Cloacimonadota, and Desulfobacterales. The structural variation observed in lipase-box motifs and signal peptides suggests functional differentiation linked to redox and oxygen gradients across depths. Phylogenetic analysis of predicted and reference enzymes showed depth-specific clustering, with extracellular depolymerases predominant in oxic layers and intracellular forms more common in microoxic-anoxic zones. Overall, our results expand the known diversity of PHB-degrading lineages in extreme environments and highlight several candidate enzymes with potential biotechnological relevance for future experimental characterisation.

