===== 12813072 | Ralstonia eutropha H16 encodes two and possibly three intracellular Poly[D-(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate] depolymerase genes.
J: Journal of bacteriology | Y: 2003 Jul | DOI: 
Intracellular poly[D-(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate] (PHB) depolymerases degrade PHB granules to oligomers and monomers of 3-hydroxybutyric acid. Recently an intracellular PHB depolymerase gene (phaZ1) from Ralstonia eutropha was identified. We now report identification of candidate PHB depolymerase genes from R. eutropha, namely, phaZ2 and phaZ3, and their characterization in vivo. phaZ1 was used to identify two candidate depolymerase genes in the genome of Ralstonia metallidurans. phaZ1 and these genes were then used to design degenerate primers. These primers and PCR methods on the R. eutropha genome were used to identify two new candidate depolymerase genes in R. eutropha: phaZ2 and phaZ3. Inverse PCR methods were used to obtain the complete sequence of phaZ3, and library screening was used to obtain the complete sequence of phaZ2. PhaZ1, PhaZ2, and PhaZ3 share approximately 30% sequence identity. The function of PhaZ2 and PhaZ3 was examined by generating R. eutropha H16 deletion strains (Delta phaZ1, Delta phaZ2, Delta phaZ3, Delta phaZ1 Delta phaZ2, Delta phaZ1 Delta phaZ3, Delta phaZ2 Delta phaZ3, and Delta phaZ1 Delta phaZ2 Delta phaZ3). These strains were analyzed for PHB production and utilization under two sets of conditions. When cells were grown in rich medium, PhaZ1 was sufficient to account for intracellular PHB degradation. When cells that had accumulated approximately 80% (cell dry weight) PHB were subjected to PHB utilization conditions, PhaZ1 and PhaZ2 were sufficient to account for PHB degradation. PhaZ2 is thus suggested to be an intracellular depolymerase. The role of PhaZ3 remains to be established.

===== 12775684 | Purification and properties of an intracellular 3-hydroxybutyrate-oligomer hydrolase (PhaZ2) in Ralstonia eutropha H16 and its identification as a novel intracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase.
J: Journal of bacteriology | Y: 2003 Jun | DOI: 
An intracellular 3-hydroxybutyrate (3HB)-oligomer hydrolase (PhaZ2(Reu)) of Ralstonia eutropha was purified from Escherichia coli harboring a plasmid containing phaZ2(Reu). The purified enzyme hydrolyzed linear and cyclic 3HB-oligomers. Although it did not degrade crystalline poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB), the purified enzyme degraded artificial amorphous PHB at a rate similar to that of the previously identified intracellular PHB (iPHB) depolymerase (PhaZ1(Reu)). The enzyme appeared to be an endo-type hydrolase, since it actively hydrolyzed cyclic 3HB-oligomers. However, it degraded various linear 3HB-oligomers and amorphous PHB in the fashion of an exo-type hydrolase, releasing one monomer unit at a time. PhaZ2 was found to bind to PHB inclusion bodies and as a soluble enzyme to cell-free supernatant fractions in R. eutropha; in contrast, PhaZ1 bound exclusively to the inclusion bodies. When R. eutropha H16 was cultivated in a nutrient-rich medium, the transient deposition of PHB was observed: the content of PHB was maximized in the log growth phase (12 h, ca. 14% PHB of dry cell weight) and decreased to a very low level in the stationary phase (ca. 1% of dry cell weight). In each phaZ1-null mutant and phaZ2-null mutant, the PHB content in the cell increased to ca. 5% in the stationary phase. A double mutant lacking both phaZ1 and phaZ2 showed increased PHB content in the log phase (ca. 20%) and also an elevated PHB level (ca. 8%) in the stationary phase. These results indicate that PhaZ2 is a novel iPHB depolymerase, which participates in the mobilization of PHB in R. eutropha along with PhaZ1.

===== 16199568 | Properties of a novel intracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase with high specific activity (PhaZd) in Wautersia eutropha H16.
J: Journal of bacteriology | Y: 2005 Oct | DOI: 
A novel intracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerase (PhaZd) of Wautersia eutropha (formerly Ralstonia eutropha) H16 which shows similarity with the catalytic domain of the extracellular PHB depolymerase in Ralstonia pickettii T1 was identified. The positions of the catalytic triad (Ser190-Asp266-His330) and oxyanion hole (His108) in the amino acid sequence of PhaZd deduced from the nucleotide sequence roughly accorded with those of the extracellular PHB depolymerase of R. pickettii T1, but a signal peptide, a linker domain, and a substrate binding domain were missing. The PhaZd gene was cloned and the gene product was purified from Escherichia coli. The specific activity of PhaZd toward artificial amorphous PHB granules was significantly greater than that of other known intracellular PHB depolymerase or 3-hydroxybutyrate (3HB) oligomer hydrolases of W. eutropha H16. The enzyme degraded artificial amorphous PHB granules and mainly released various 3-hydroxybutyrate oligomers. PhaZd distributed nearly equally between PHB inclusion bodies and the cytosolic fraction. The amount of PHB was greater in phaZd deletion mutant cells than the wild-type cells under various culture conditions. These results indicate that PhaZd is a novel intracellular PHB depolymerase which participates in the mobilization of PHB in W. eutropha H16 along with other PHB depolymerases.

===== 16233278 | Cloning of an intracellular D(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate-oligomer hydrolase gene from Ralstonia eutropha H16 and identification of the active site serine residue by site-directed mutagenesis.
J: Journal of bioscience and bioengineering | Y: 2002 | DOI: 
An intracellular D(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate (3HB)-oligomer hydrolase gene from Ralstonia eutropha (formerly Alcaligenes eutrophus) H16 was cloned, sequenced, and characterized. As a hybridization probe to screen restriction digests of chromosomal DNA, an extracellular 3HB-oligomer hydrolase gene from Ralstonia pickettii strain (formerly Pseudomonas sp. strain) A1 was used. A specific hybridization signal was obtained and a 6.5-kbp SmaI fragment was cloned in an Escherichia coli phagemid vector. The crude extract from E. coli with this plasmid showed 3HB-trimer hydrolase activity. The subcloned 3.2-kbp fragment still showed 3HB-trimer hydrolase activity in E. coli and expressed an approximately 78-kDa protein in an in vitro transcription-translation system. Nucleotide sequence analysis of the 3.2-kbp fragment showed an open reading frame that encodes a polypeptide with a deduced molecular weight of 78,510. The putative amino acid sequence showed 54% identity with that of the oligomer hydrolase from R. pickettii A1. By site-directed mutagenesis, a novel amino acid sequence (S-V-S*-N-G) containing an essential serine residue in the catalytic center of the enzyme was determined. The gene product was found in PHB-rich cells of R. eutropha by immunodetection. The expressed 3HB-oligomer hydrolase localized both in the supernatant fraction and the PHB granules of the cells.

===== 16030206 | Novel intracellular 3-hydroxybutyrate-oligomer hydrolase in Wautersia eutropha H16.
J: Journal of bacteriology | Y: 2005 Aug | DOI: 
Wautersia eutropha H16 (formerly Ralstonia eutropha) mobilizes intracellularly accumulated poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) with intracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerases. In this study, a novel intracellular 3-hydroxybutyrate-oligomer hydrolase (PhaZc) gene was cloned and overexpressed in Escherichia coli. Then PhaZc was purified and characterized. Immunoblot analysis with polyclonal antiserum against PhaZc revealed that most PhaZc is present in the cytosolic fraction and a small amount is present in the poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) inclusion bodies of W. eutropha. PhaZc degraded various 3-hydroxybutyrate oligomers at a high specific activity and artificial amorphous poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) at a lower specific activity. Native PHB granules and semicrystalline PHB were not degraded by PhaZc. A PhaZ deletion mutation enhanced the deposition of PHB in the logarithmic phase in nutrient-rich medium. PhaZc differs from the hydrolases of W. eutropha previously reported and is a novel type of intracellular 3-hydroxybutyrate-oligomer hydrolase, and it participates in the mobilization of PHB along with other hydrolases.

===== 15170237 | Roles of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerase and 3HB-oligomer hydrolase in bacterial PHB metabolism.
J: Current microbiology | Y: 2004 Jun | DOI: 
Many poly-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB)-degrading enzymes have been studied. But biological roles of 3HB-oligomer hydrolases (3HBOHs) and how PHB depolymerases (PHBDPs) and 3HBOHs cooperate in PHB metabolism are not fully elucidated. In this study, several PHBDPs and 3HBOHs from three types of bacteria were purified, and their substrate specificity, kinetic properties, and degradation products were investigated. From the results, PHBDP and 3HBOH seemed to play a role in PHB metabolism in three types of bacteria, as follows: (A) In Ralstonia pickettii T1, an extracellular PHBDP degrades extracellular PHB to various-sized 3HB-oligomers, which an extracellular 3HBOH hydrolyzes to 3HB-monomers. (B) In Acidovorax sp. SA1, an extracellular PHBDP hydrolyzes extracellular PHB to small 3HB-oligomers (dimer and trimer), which an intracellular 3HBOH efficiently degrades to 3HB in the cell. (C) In Ralstonia eutropha H16, an intracellular 3HBOH helps in the degradation of intracellular PHB inclusions by PHBDP.

===== 11114905 | Cloning of an intracellular Poly[D(-)-3-Hydroxybutyrate] depolymerase gene from Ralstonia eutropha H16 and characterization of the gene product.
J: Journal of bacteriology | Y: 2001 Jan | DOI: 
An intracellular poly[D(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate] (PHB) depolymerase gene (phaZ) has been cloned from Ralstonia eutropha H16 by the shotgun method, sequenced, and characterized. Nucleotide sequence analysis of a 2.3-kbp DNA fragment revealed an open reading frame of 1,260 bp, encoding a protein of 419 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 47,316 Da. The crude extract of Escherichia coli containing the PHB depolymerase gene digested artificial amorphous PHB granules and released mainly oligomeric D(-)-3-hydroxybutyrate, with some monomer. The gene product did not hydrolyze crystalline PHB or freeze-dried artificial amorphous PHB granules. The deduced amino acid sequence lacked sequence corresponding to a classical lipase box, Gly-X-Ser-X-Gly. The gene product was expressed in R. eutropha cells concomitant with the synthesis of PHB and localized in PHB granules. Although a mutant of R. eutropha whose phaZ gene was disrupted showed a higher PHB content compared to the wild type in a nutrient-rich medium, it accumulated PHB as much as the wild type did in a nitrogen-free, carbon-rich medium. These results indicate that the cloned phaZ gene encodes an intracellular PHB depolymerase in R. eutropha.

===== 18156336 | Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerase PhaZa1 is involved in mobilization of accumulated PHB in Ralstonia eutropha H16.
J: Applied and environmental microbiology | Y: 2008 Feb | DOI: 
The recently finished genome sequence of Ralstonia eutropha H16 harbors nine genes that are thought to encode functions for intracellular depolymerization (mobilization) of storage poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB). Based on amino acid similarities, the gene products belong to four classes (PhaZa1 to PhaZa5, PhaZb, PhaZc, and PhaZd1/PhaZd2). However, convincing direct evidence for the in vivo roles of the gene products is poor. In this study, we selected four candidate genes (phaZa1, phaZb, phaZc, and phaZd1) representing the four classes and investigated the physiological function of the gene products (i) with recombinant Escherichia coli strains and (ii) with R. eutropha null mutants. Evidence for weak but significant PHB depolymerase activity was obtained only for PhaZa1. The physiological roles of the other potential PHB depolymerases remain uncertain.

===== 24907326 | To be or not to be a poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerase: PhaZd1 (PhaZ6) and PhaZd2 (PhaZ7) of Ralstonia eutropha, highly active PHB depolymerases with no detectable role in mobilization of accumulated PHB.
J: Applied and environmental microbiology | Y: 2014 Aug | DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01056-14
The putative physiological functions of two related intracellular poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerases, PhaZd1 and PhaZd2, of Ralstonia eutropha H16 were investigated. Purified PhaZd1 and PhaZd2 were active with native PHB granules in vitro. Partial removal of the proteinaceous surface layer of native PHB granules by trypsin treatment or the use of PHB granules isolated from ΔphaP1 or ΔphaP1-phaP5 mutant strains resulted in increased specific PHB depolymerase activity, especially for PhaZd2. Constitutive expression of PhaZd1 or PhaZd2 reduced or even prevented the accumulation of PHB under PHB-permissive conditions in vivo. Expression of translational fusions of enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP) with PhaZd1 and PhaZd2 in which the active-site serines (S190 and Ser193) were replaced with alanine resulted in the colocalization of only PhaZd1 fusions with PHB granules. C-terminal fusions of inactive PhaZd2(S193A) with EYFP revealed the presence of spindle-like structures, and no colocalization with PHB granules was observed. Chromosomal deletion of phaZd1, phaZd2, or both depolymerase genes had no significant effect on PHB accumulation and mobilization during growth in nutrient broth (NB) or NB-gluconate medium. Moreover, neither proteome analysis of purified native PHB granules nor lacZ fusion studies gave any indication that PhaZd1 or PhaZd2 was detectably present in the PHB granule fraction or expressed at all during growth on NB-gluconate medium. In conclusion, PhaZd1 and PhaZd2 are two PHB depolymerases with a high capacity to degrade PHB when artificially expressed but are apparently not involved in PHB mobilization in the wild type. The true in vivo functions of PhaZd1 and PhaZd2 remain obscure.

===== 27059479 | A study on the relation between poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) depolymerases or oligomer hydrolases and molecular weight of polyhydroxyalkanoates accumulating in Cupriavidus necator H16.
J: Journal of biotechnology | Y: 2016 Jun 10 | DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2016.04.004
Cupriavidus necator H16 has nine genes of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) depolymerases or oligomer hydrolases (intracellular PHB mobilization enzymes). In this study, we evaluated the relation between these genes and the accumulation, consumption, and molecular weight of polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) accumulating in strain H16 and in a recombinant C. necator strain, KNK-005, which harbors an NSDG mutant of the PHA synthase gene (phaCAc) from Aeromonas caviae. PhaZ6 had a significant influence on the molecular weight of PHA when palm kernel oil was used as a carbon source. The 005dZ6 strain (ΔphaZ6 mutant of KNK-005) could produce ultra-high-molecular-weight poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate) (PHBHHx) with weight-average molecular weight (Mw) >3.0×10(6) (approximately double that of KNK-005). Under PHA consumption conditions, deletion of phaZ1 and phaZ2 had a significant and slight attenuating effect, respectively, on the reduction in PHA content of KNK-005 cells. Regardless of the PHA consumption, its Mw did not decrease. Thus, 005dZ126 (the ΔphaZ1ΔphaZ2ΔphaZ6 triple mutant of KNK-005) is a promising strain capable of producing PHBHHx of ultra-high-molecular-weight and barely degrades PHBHHx enzymatically intracellularly. This is the first report examining the relation between intracellular PHB mobilization enzymes and molecular weight of PHAs accumulating in C. necator H16 and the derivatives.

